Third Text
ISSN: 0952-8822 (Print) 1475-5297 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ctte20
(Post)modernism and Feminist Art History The
Reception of the Male Nude in Twentieth‐century
Greek Painting
Angela Dimitrakaki
To cite this article: Angela Dimitrakaki (2003) (Post)modernism and Feminist Art History The
Reception of the Male Nude in Twentieth‐century Greek Painting, Third Text, 17:3, 241-259,
DOI: 10.1080/0952882032000136876
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/0952882032000136876
Published online: 04 Jun 2010.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 405
View related articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ctte20

(Post)modernism and Feminist
Art History
The Reception of the Male Nude in
Twentieth-century Greek Painting
Angela Dimitrakaki
My aim in this paper is to trace the intersection of discourses and
practices that have been central in the construction and reproduction of
particular meanings (predominantly meanings of and about partic-
ularity) in art criticism and art history in modern Greece. The
particularity of such meanings, framed and motivated by the desire to
establish and secure a cultural/national identity rather than a politics
around identity that could have potentially incorporated a range of
interconnected references, has been instrumental in engendering the
isolation that twentieth-century Greek art has suffered even in explicitly
critical contexts such as that of feminist art history. To suggest that
feminist art history, geographically located in the West at the moment of
its inception in the late 1960s, became early on an ideological
battleground that also attempted to reread cultural narratives beyond
their specificities is perhaps to state the obvious. What is less obvious is
why the emergence of this discursive framework was not enabled
everywhere and whether this had anything to do with the ideological
construct of the ‘periphery’. I therefore propose to read, dialectically, an
absence (that of feminist art history) and a presence (that of periphery as
ideology). My point is that their interface impacted on the (re)production
of meanings which organised the totality of socially produced ‘differ-
ences’ hierarchically in modern Greece. These questions are as much my
concern here as the case study through and by which I will attempt to
unlock their dynamics – this being the construction of meaning around
the male nude in a cultural habitus that, as we shall see, resisted the
postmodern at the same time that it surrendered to it because of the
latter’s signifying power in a global context.
What perhaps facilitates this enquiry today, lending it at the same time
an ironic twist, is the gradual but widespread departure from references
Third Text ISSN 0952-8822 print/ISSN 1475-5297 online © 2003 Kala Press/Black Umbrella
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/0952882032000136876
Third Text, Vol. 17, Issue 3, 2003, 241–259

242
to postmodernism in the Western centres – at least with regard to the
visual arts. ‘Postmodernism’ now tends to be regarded as alluding to a
recent, self-referential past which managed to theorise itself to death – a
borderline cultural ‘moment’, somewhere between history and the
opacity of the contemporary scene, but with which we can engage
discursively from our vantage point of beyond-the-post.1 Having said
this, the phrase ‘somewhere between history and the contemporary’
captures the tension generated by the unclear positioning of the Greek art
scene in an international context from the emergence of the modern
Greek state in the nineteenth century to the present day. I will therefore
use the term (post)modernism to express this tension within the specific
context of my enquiry.
THE QUESTION OF (POST)MODERNISM IN GREEK ART
The central question involves a reflection on the historical demands that
inhibited the emergence of feminist art history in Greece at a moment
when other parameters of postmodern culture2 were being accepted and
incorporated in cultural discourse – even if with some scepticism and, not
least, an inevitable dose of opportunism. The absence of ‘feminist art
history’ in relation to ‘the body’ in Greek art history and criticism
prompts the question of whether this absence was connected with the
cultural environment that sustained it. Was postmodernism ultimately
perceived in Greece as a troubled but potentially disruptive moment in
which other subjects, i.e. women artists, sought to articulate a critical
vision?
The first concrete but sporadic references to postmodernism appeared
in Greece at the end of the 1970s and the beginning of the 1980s,
precisely at the moment when the Greek women’s movement made its
own claims towards the transformation of gender relations.3 Why, then,
did the discussions about postmodernism not engage with gender and
sexual difference, especially as identity politics were at the time a major
force in the Western art scene? The answer to this question involves
postmodernism’s reception in Greece which, on the one hand, emphas-
ised the division between progressive and reactionary forces and, on the
other, exposed a certain affinity between them. This is more of a
historically generated contradiction than a paradox. The arguments used
in discussions of the postmodern exemplify a tension between asserting
the correspondence of artistic practices to a particular historical reality
and introducing postmodernism as the latest prop of Western culture, to
which Greece felt it belonged but towards which it was problematically
positioned at the same time. The emphasis on the acceptance of tradition
(where the meanings and construction of tradition are only parenthet-
ically questioned if at all) directly or implicitly identified the postmodern
with the neo-classicism of the Italian trans-avantgardia together with
their American counterparts. Such a formulation precluded the negotia-
tion of any other meanings that the postmodern might hold within
particular social frames and in regard to the needs of culturally
marginalised social groups such as women.
The absence of a sustained analysis of conceptual art in Greece, which
was developed in the mid-1970s by women artists – among them Aspa
1. To give one example, the
recent textbook by Julie
Sheldon and Pam
Meecham, Modern Art: A
Critical Introduction,
Routledge, 2000,
encompasses references to
Manet and Damien Hirst.
The postmodern break, to
which students and tutors
in Britain have been
accustomed, is critically
displaced.
2. Since Craig Owens’s essay
‘The Discourse of Others:
Feminists and
Postmodernism’ in The
Anti-aesthetic, ed Hal
Foster, Bay Press, 1983,
which discussed feminist
artists’ work as being
instrumental in what came
to be known as
postmodernism in the visual
arts, the relationship
between feminism and
postmodernism has been a
matter of contestation and
one that exceeds the
disciplinary concerns of art
history. Nonetheless, the
emergence of feminist art
history coincided with the
consolidation of the
postmodern turn, whatever
the dynamics of their
relationship. Therefore, as
regards the questions this
article poses, my aim is to
address the selective
representation of
postmodern culture and
theory in Greece; in other
words, to address the non-
emergence of feminist art
history as part of
postmodern culture. If
Owens was right in
claiming such a strong link,
then this gap becomes even
more problematic.
3. The waves of feminist
uprising in modern Greek
society (from the late
nineteenth century
onwards) have been
researched and documented
by Greek feminist scholars.
On feminism and the visual
arts, see my ‘Elements of a
Secret History: Women, Art
and Gender in Modern
Greece’, Third Text, 37,
winter 1996–97, pp 63–74.

243
Stassinopoulou, Leda Papakonstantinou, and Vasso Kyriaki – and
corresponded to the fervent political climate after the fall of the junta in
1974, or feminist performance and installation art,4 does not really
facilitate a re-examination of what might have possibly constituted a
‘postmodern’ shift in the Greek art scene. It does not facilitate a debate
around the possible terms of postmodern Greek painting either – and
what I mean by this is whether it is justified to speak about a certain
break in meaning, one engendered by historical conditions calling for the
deconstruction of accepted cultural and artistic paradigms in Greece,
rather than merely engaging in a game of vacuous syncretism between
painting here (Greece) and there (West), by using developments in the
West as a template. Yet it is important to stress that in Greece painting,
although clearly dominant, was not perceived as antagonistic, in its
4. Leda Papakonstantinou,
who lived and worked in
London during the junta,
was most probably the first
Greek artist to structure her
performances along a
feminist language of social
criticism in the early 1970s.
Aspa Stassinopoulou, Untitled, 1987. Courtesy of the artist

244
purposes and meanings, to other artistic practices. Again, the predom-
inantly formalist analyses failed to reflect on the emergence of diverse
practices in any other terms than ‘experimentation’ (apparently, the
modernist lexicon was hard to get rid of). For the present analysis, most
problematic remains the fact that such arguments foreclosed possibly
different aspects of the postmodern in Greece and particularly the
possibility of a critique of modernism grounded in the demands of
hitherto excluded social groups. For to accept that all Greek art of the
twentieth century is in fact postmodern means to posit Greek art in a
closed and uncritical relationship to an imported version of modernism
that, in the best case, finally collapses what could be called an originality
of forms with certain marginalised meanings of modernism itself –
especially those involving liminal acts of social resistance.
Aspa Stassinopoulou, Untitled, 1988. Courtesy of the artist

245
Even those artists and critics who argued for the social role of art did
not manage for the most part to question the role of the avant-garde
artist, the critique launched against the latter’s late twentieth-century
apparition and what this critique meant for marginalised social groups
attempting to articulate a politics of representation. A postmodernism
that could pose such questions, usually referred to as critical post-
modernism, appears to be completely absent in the Greek context.
Significantly, not even the few feminist artists who openly questioned
gender relations in their practice sought to link their work with a critique
of modernism. Postmodernism was ultimately grasped as a fundamen-
tally reactionary cultural paradigm (by the politicised artists who
identified with the Greek Left) or a set of easily detectable features of
contemporary art (by the establishment whose task was to market Greek
art abroad): the return to figurative painting, the withdrawal from an
originality of forms as a criterion of ‘good’ art, the exhaustive (but
definitive because of its emphatic reiteration of an ‘end’ discourse)
recycling of tradition.5
The possible transformation of the meanings of the postmodern in the
cultural paradigm of Greece was the object of debate as the latter could be
seen to emerge in the 1987 conference Modern–Postmodern in Athens
which brought together some of the best known and most influential
historians, critics, and artists. No discussion around the claims of any
particular social group within the cultural reality of Greece took place. If
any social group was implicitly present, that was ‘Greek artists’, whose
experience was contrasted with that of ‘Western artists’. What largely
seems to have defined the politics of this homogenisation is the
unarticulated but crucial axis of every approach: the two points of
reference in every presentation, or rather the two poles of any
juxtaposition, were Greece and what could be called, in an absurd
reversal, the Dominant Other, an amalgam of widespread trends of a
foreign reality which had somehow been received in Greece but which had
failed to receive Greece. Two factors determining the incorporation of
Greece in this Dominant Other in terms of a historical necessity were, first,
the shifting conditions of Greek culture which, despite their particularity,
called for a new theorisation of the issues involved and, second, the
acknowledgement that postmodernism constituted the only historical
possibility for the theorisation of Greek art in the contemporary moment,
precisely because of the dominance and currency of the term.
Nevertheless, the artist Dimosthenis Kokkinidis noted that ‘the
discussion about postmodernism cannot be based upon the inadequate
and weak commentary on Greek modernism. Transposing this discussion
into a conceptually and ideologically foreign environment, it brings forth
its own subjection to the latter.’6 Kokkinidis implicitly posits here one of
the most crucial questions regarding the fate of Greek art: the ‘problem’
of art history and criticism. And he also argues that in Greece:
. . . tradition, avant-garde and now post-avant-garde do not differentiate;
they are interlaced and get mixed up as do our criteria and critical ability.
They are not challenged by theoretical and ideological debates and
displacements. Everything and everybody goes.7
These comments, justified as they may be, entail yet another mystifica-
tion for they do not attempt a critique of the category/identity of the
5. See the contributions to the
volume Monterno-
Metamonterno [Modern-
Postmodern], Smili, Athens,
1988, based on a
conference of the same title.
6. Dimosthenis Kokkinidis,
‘Monternismos,
Metamonternismos kai e
Theoretike mas Adraneia’
[Modernism,
Postmodernism and Our
Theoretical Inertia], ibid,
p 228.
7. Ibid.

246
‘Greek artist’ which hid from view at least the instrumental presence of
gender hierarchies and class divisions in the history of Greek art. And this
was precisely why not everything and everybody was included in the
annals of Greek (post)modernism.
I do not mean of course that the identity of the Greek artist has not
been subject to historical processes. But because history did not lead to
the dismantling of hegemonic paradigms in an international context, the
‘Greek artist’, as an identity and a concept, continued to be both a real
effect and a symbolic expression of a historical contradiction. The
ideological construction of the ‘Greek artist’ operated simultaneously as
a regressive neutralisation of gendered and classed identities and a
glamorisation of a reactionary nationalism but also as a point of
resistance, a positive recasting of a marginalisation in the spaces of the
Dominant Other. Sotiris Sorongas, one of the most prominent artists in
Greece, used an even harsher language regarding the positioning of
Greece ‘at the periphery of control centres’ and how this affects cultural
issues. He argued that ‘the imposition and spread of any current -ism,
like a kind of cultural imperialism, absorbs the truth of the other and
incorporates it into the very same mechanism’.8 But, from the perspective
of a feminist art history, this so-called ‘truth of the other’ remained a
permanently unvoiced condition. A thorough examination of images of
the body in modern Greek art around the axis of sexual politics would
reveal otherness as a far more complex articulation (even in its local
context) than that pertaining to issues of cultural imperialism. Yet that
would require a totally different understanding of the political in art. But
already the analysis so far seems to suggest that the centre–periphery
polarisation has been an over-determining ideological factor, as much as
a lived reality, for artists and historians alike. It underwrites the efforts to
sustain a viable model of national identity in the visual arts and then
adapt this model to received patterns of periodisation that would allow
the negotiation of cultural interaction with the Dominant Other on more
equal terms.
PAINTING, POLITICS AND THE BODY IN MODERN
GREEK ART
To understand the absence of a discourse on sexual politics in Greek art,
it is necessary to attend to the historical conditions that defined the
meaning of the political during the junta and after 1974, especially with
regard to the body as a (political) referent. The implications of this
absence are possibly far-reaching for the development of the Greek art
scene as a whole but also highly relevant to the suppression of meanings
of difference in images of the male body, resting, as this is, on the absence
of a critical (feminist) discursive framework. My concern in this instance
is to problematise the notion of the political itself and argue that there
can be several, possibly competing, articulations of a political practice in
art. If feminist politics became invisible at a certain historical moment
when politics and art did become an issue in Greece, this possibly
suggests the hegemonic function of a specific definition of the political,
one privileged by the historical moment itself. As argued in some quarters
of political theory, hegemony can be understood as a relational outcome
8. Sotiris Sorongas, ‘O
Metamonternismos ki
Emeis’ [Postmodernism and
Us], ibid, pp 230–1.

247
that involves intellectual leadership and as such it remains rooted in
historical developments.9
Within the oppressive regime of the military junta, critical realism
acquired a revolutionary aura by elaborating images of the body which
claimed their contextual, social meanings through an intense and risky
dialogue with the body politic.10 Interestingly, it was the possibility of a
return to the occasionally crudely ‘realistic’ figure in painting that made
critical realism such an apt political weapon under the circumstances.
There was a demand for a visual language that would be accessible to a
wide public, a visual language which could manipulate elements of
recognisable signifiers so as to offer a critical view of reality.11 According
to the artists whose names have been more or less connected with critical
realism in Greece – male artists in their majority – the abstract tendencies
of the 1960s could all too easily be assimilated within the dominant
formalist language of art criticism where art featured as a safeguarded
territory of disengaged aesthetic pleasure and technical competence – and
this despite the efforts of politically active abstract painters such as
Yannis Hainis who argued for the social relevance of their practice. By
turning to painting, critical realists sought to achieve a renewed political
function for the already dominant paradigm of Greek art, i.e. figurative
painting, which could only emerge out of a political understanding of the
creative act, and a certain level of freedom regarding the visual
negotiation of their material. In the early 1970s the manipulation and
merging of images facilitated today by digital technology was not
available (at least in Greece) and painting offered unique possibilities for
focusing on various aspects of daily and political life.
Painting could also be something more than the visual documentation
of reality, and, under the circumstances, photography was primarily
linked to visual documentation. During the junta regime, documentation
was what the foreign press did – to the extent it was feasible. ‘Reality’
was also a visual narrative successfully edited by the authorities. Leaving
the absence of technological infrastructure aside, photography and video
thus became problematic as implicated in the techniques of power of an
oppressive regime. Painting, on the other hand, especially painting that
approximated but was not photography, became associated with a type
of visual commentary that could be exploratory and potentially
condemning. Consequently, the modernist axiom of personal expression
found new currency. Not only did it oppose the uniformity advocated in
an extremely nationalist discourse but it could, though not always,
protect the artist against accusations of explicitly subversive action
directed against the junta that had imposed a state of martial law.
The politicisation of images of the body during the junta period was
crucial for fixing the meaning of the political in the context of
contemporary Greek art in the late 1970s and 1980s. For some, ‘politics
and art’ was something that Greek artists had to leave behind because it
was linked to a recent traumatic phase in the country’s history. And when
the ferment of the Left subsided in the early 1980s (following the
electoral victory of PASOK – Panhellenic Socialist Movement – which
coincided with the advent of postmodernism in Greece), the encounter of
politics and art in general became for many concomitant with a certain
disillusionment or a nostalgic reiteration of a lost ethics associated with
modernism.
9. Inspired by Gramsci’s
conception of hegemony
(which also had an impact
on feminist art history in
Britain), this is extensively
discussed in the work of
the Marxist theorist Nikos
Poulantzas. See especially
his Political Power and
Social Classes, New Left
Books, London, 1973.
10. ‘Critical realism’ [Kritikos
Realismos] was used to
describe a particular kind
of painting in Greece in
the early to mid-1970s
and bears no relation to
the philosophical current
under the same name (also
referred to as ‘critical
naturalism’) whose
founder is the British
philosopher Roy Bhaskar.
It is closer to but still
distinct from the uses of
the same term in the
1980s British art scene to
refer to a political form of
art centred on the figure.
11. Peggy Kounenaki, Neoi
Ellines Realistes
1971–1973 [New Greek
Realists 1971–1973],
Extantas, Athens, 1988.

248
On the other hand, it is important to consider what ‘politics and art’
signified in the clusters of resistance where such references persisted. In the
1970s the discourse of the Greek Left was in support of the women’s
movement demands but also saw gender issues as a matter of secondary
importance. The relative marginalisation of feminism within the Greek Left
has to be understood, however, as a highly specific outcome of the historical
circumstances, especially the fight against the military regime, which partly
had to involve an abstract human subject as its focus. A critique of
patriarchal relations would have been perceived as a threat to the social
cohesion necessary for the transition to democracy and its accompanying
rhetorics that wanted the ‘people’ united against the totalitarian regime.
For the first time since the 1940s, the Left was in position to claim a shared
vision for a radically transformed society. But the very idea of ‘political
action’ remained tied to party politics, a fact that alienated many women
artists. This was not because they did not identify with the discourse of the
Left but because, in the context of party politics (the notorious fights
among the USSR-oriented Communist Party of the ‘exterior’, the Euro-
oriented Communist Party of the ‘interior’ and the more ‘pragmatic’
PASOK), there was little room for their ‘particular’ concerns – despite the
occasional ‘women artists’ shows organised normally in the form of
uncurated events by this or that sympathetic party.
In the 1980s, the institutionalisation of feminism, concurrent with the
gradual loss of a revolutionary vision on the part of the Left, seemed only
to grant power of persuasion to the liberal argument that resistance could
be achieved at a personal level. The legacy of certain misreadings of
modernism in Greece, or in stronger terms the grip of the bourgeoisie on
the visual arts establishment, had already prepared the ideological ground
for a facile separation of the personal from the political. And this despite
the prominence of ‘the personal is political’ motto in the Greek women’s
movement at the time. The concerns of the latter however, centred as they
were on family law, employment, and abortion rights, saw the arts
(especially the visual arts) as of marginal relevance to more pressing issues.
It was not easy for feminist activists to consider the possible relevance of
images in art to the wider realm of visual culture –especially as art
historians kept an eloquent distance from feminism while refusing to
rethink the disciplinary boundaries of their practice at the same time.
In 1988, the use of the term ‘political’ in Martha Christofoglou’s
‘Avant-gardes’ et politisation dans l’art n´eohell´enique (1965–1975), the
most thorough account to date (still unpublished, however), is indicative.
Here references to the political in art denote the particular configuration of
Left politics and aesthetic concerns. Women’s production is still framed
within the ‘equal status’ and ‘quality art’ rhetoric and the possibility of a
feminist politics in art is not even considered. On the contrary, women’s
work is read as political only in so far as it has managed to transcend the
particular concerns of the female subject (either collective or individual),
which are thus excluded from the realm of the political itself.12
Within the frame of these discourses, where art criticism and art
history were configured, approaches to the body in art never came to be
centred on sexual politics. Even in the reinvigorated existentialism
concurrent with the debates over the postmodern in Greece throughout
the 1980s, sexual politics remained the unidentified issue in both art
history and criticism, despite the relative visibility of works by women
12. Martha Christofoglou,
‘Avant-gardes’ et
politisation dans l’art
n´eohell´enique
(1965–1975), unpublished
PhD thesis, University of
Paris I, 1988. See
especially pp 13–16 and
pp 152–3. Notably, unlike
the discourse of other
human sciences, the
configuration of Marxism
and aesthetics in Greece
remained of a profoundly
humanist orientation and
did not engage with the
break of Althusserian
philosophy regarding the
construction of the subject
through ideology. Locating
the demands of critical
realism in a humanist
discourse was instrumental
in the presentation of the
tradition(s) of realism in
Greece as exclusively
male. The exhibition O
Neorealismos sten Ellineke
Zografike, 1960–1980
[New Realism in Greek
Painting, 1960–1980] held
at the Municipal Gallery
of Rhodes in 1983,
included only three
women out of 32 artists.
Notably, the influential
annual publication
Hroniko (published by
Ora Gallery), which
attracted many left-wing
artists and theorists as
both audience and
contributors, had a special
issue on art and politics in
1975. Only the painter
Vaggelis Dimitreas claimed
in that context that ‘art is
politics, if by this word
one does not refer to the
narrow mechanism of a
political party but a wider
socio-political sphere from
which one cannot distance
himself just by claiming
not to be concerned with
politics’; ibid, p 52.

249
artists such as Papakonstantinou, Roubani, Kanagini, Daskopoulou, and
Xenou – to name but a few – whose practice clearly questioned the
politics of representation of the gendered and sexed body in the specular
economy of an increasingly global West.13 The silence of a discipline
policing the ideological premises of its own practice, which presumably
operates within a gender-neutral frame, was counterpoised by the equally
persistent preoccupation of Greek women painters with the re-inscrip-
tion of the body into processes of self-definition. But, in the historical and
ideological framework I have described so far, it can be argued that
women artists in Greece sought to safeguard the personal from its
recuperation into a political frame that only granted partial visibility to
‘the experience of being a woman’. Their choice, if it ever was one, turns
them into a peculiar brand of Foucauldian postmodernists, as it is
concerned with the inscription of power on bodies whose experience
cannot allegedly be represented by and through traditional political
praxis. This, however, proved to be a highly problematic position.
The art critics’ assertion in the late 1980s that finally the ‘gap’ between
Greece and the West had been bridged meant that Greek artists, treated
again as a homogeneous group, were encouraged to follow their so-called
personal visions, assured that ‘every artistic work originates in the self and
always develops within its own material and envisioning space’.14 And
these personal visions accommodated virtually anything: the body in
pieces seen as an allegory of postmodern angst, the nostalgic or ironic
refashioning of a loosely defined national subject, the critique on the
collapse of emancipatory metanarratives, the pleasures and discontents of
a consumerist culture, and so on. Everything could be interpreted along
the lines of a subjective re-inscription of the social. The brief moment of
the politicisation of the body in the 1970s was seen as co-extensive with
the exceptional circumstances of a particularly oppressive regime. When
these conditions changed, art was able to return to its ‘proper’ function
and become again the materialised evidence of the struggle of the
individual with the world.15 Needless to add, in the 1980s the art market
became all the more powerful in Greece and strongly supportive of this
renewed emphasis on individual expression. By the early 1990s the body
had become an implicit reference in the debates over the meaning of the
artistic practice between the so-called neo-traditionalists and those who
believed in the possibility of existence of a new avant-garde.16
Significantly, the advocates of both tendencies considered postmodernism
in stylistic rather than historical terms, thereby foreclosing any theorisa-
tion of difference and any attempt to raise the issue of what might actually
constitute a political instance in postmodern Greek art.
THE TRADITION(S) OF THE BODY IN PAINTING
Despite the persistent presence of the human figure in the art of modern
Greece, there is no extensive art historical study, let alone diverse
theorisations, of the body as a site of multiple investments in parallel or
competing visual languages. Consequently, to suggest a preliminary
account, one has to rely on fragmentary information derived from
exhibition catalogues, studies of a different focus and artists’ mono-
graphs, which incidentally constitute the bulk of published research.
13. A typical example of this
is the 1983 Emerging
Images exhibition in
Athens. Leda
Papakonstantinou’s
installations dealing
explicitly with the
commodification of the
female body and the
iconographical traditions
of the femininity in
Western art in her
impressive re-working of
Manet’s ‘Olympia’ are
nowhere discussed in the
catalogue essay in terms of
the sexual politics they
seek to problematise.
Instead, the catalogue text
by the art critic Efi
Strouza repeatedly
positions the artist as male
(always a ‘he’ even though
this is a rare case where
women artists are as many
as men – there are five
female and five male
artists) while relating the
works to the postmodern
‘crisis of representation’,
the ‘crisis of values’, and
the possibility of art to
find its way out of the
‘present impasse’. She
argues that the works on
show ‘represent a genesis
of new forms resulting
after a series of
catastrophic events due to
the deterministic concept
of the world’. See Efi
Strouza, Emerging Images,
Athenaum Gallery, Athens,
1983, p 19. English
translation by Efi Strouza.
14. Kostas Stavropoulos,
Synantiseis, Episemanseis,
Antiparatheseis: Dromena
88 [Encounters,
Notifications,
Juxtapositions: Actions
’88], Athens Municipal
Gallery, Athens, 1988,
unpaginated exhibition
catalogue.
15. The following extracts
constitute only a sample
of the dominant ‘personal
vision’ rhetoric. ‘These
painters deliver their
encounter with the world
expressing their position
in life. . . . They all follow
their personal vision’,
Chrysanthos Christou,
Zografoi tes Thessalonikis
tes Metapolemikes Genias
[Postwar Painters in
Thessalonike], 

250
Nevertheless, it is commonly accepted – and correctly so – that figurative
traditions, not necessarily identified with traditionally understood
realisms, have been the dominant tendencies in the visual practices of
modern Greece despite the gradual embracing of abstraction by certain
artists which reached its apogee in the 1960s.
The reasons for this continuous engagement with the figure are
complex and variable. The emphasis placed on life courses by the
National School of Fine Art (NSFA henceforth), which imported the
academism of Western Europe at the end of the nineteenth century and
then strove to free Greek art from its influence through the work of the
‘fathers’ of modern Greek art, was decisive.17 Soon enough, the pre-
eminence of the figure in classical and Byzantine art offered concrete
points of reference for the various attempts to negotiate a national
identity ‘expressed’ in a reinvented visual economy. The human form was
proposed as the link to a much desired historical continuity with a past
that was to be constantly reclaimed and at the same time denounced
throughout the century. The idealisation of ancient Greek art meant the
latter’s introduction into an interpretive framework where attendance to
the human condition was of paramount importance as the cornerstone of
the ideological interface between a moralising national discourse
addressing the public (and its so-called ‘aesthetic education’) and that of
a cosmopolitan bourgeoisie.
To give one example, Greek art historians have noted the impact of
Symbolism on the experimentations surrounding the development of a
national art language because of the former’s perceived affinity with the
metaphysical elements of Byzantine art and the simultaneous recourse to
classical myth.18 If Symbolism, among other European movements, was
so popular among Greek painters at a particular historical conjuncture,
this was precisely because its suggested forms and motifs could
accommodate existent and perhaps dominant features of a developing
modern Greek culture. Typically, for example, Symbolism encouraged a
wider range of uses of the female form. Titles from Harmony, History
and The Poet’s Muse to The Spirit of Greece were the norm (all these
works are by Gyzis but an endless list of works by other painters with
similar titles and content are dispersed across Greek art museums). The
female body was predictably treated along the lines suggested by an
allegorical visual language based on gender difference which, when
mastered by the artist, could lead to his incorporation in the national
canon: Parthenis’s painting Hercules Fighting the Amazons (1922),
where the male figure is portrayed in the act of killing a woman in an
overpowering landscape, is among the most treasured possessions of the
National Gallery in Athens. The work of women artists such as Sofia
Laskaridou involved a similar emphasis on the uses of the female nude to
which demands revolving primarily around the ‘equal’ reception of
women’s art could not attend. Abstract concepts began to be symbolised
by the female form, (re)producing a rigid polarisation between historical
agency (the artist identified as male), and the ossified, eternal symbol
which lies outside history (the image of woman).19 Against the standard
formalist readings of this generation’s work, represented by Parthenis,
claiming or implying that subject-matter was irrelevant, I would contend
that, at least for the demands of an emergent Greek paradigm, there was
a particular function assigned to the sign ‘woman’ in the re-working of
Thessalonika, 1978,
pp 7–9; ‘There is an effort
to avoid categorisations so
that the freedom of the
artist to interpret things
according to his personal
vision is respected’, argued
Nelly Missirli in Neoi
Ellines Kallitehnes. Mia
Epiloge apo to Mouseio
Vorre [New Greek Artists:
A Selection from Vorres
Museum], Vorres
Museum, 1985,
unpaginated exhibition
catalogue.
16. Vassilika Sarilaki, ‘Ding-
Dong Fighting Between
Advocates of Avant-Garde
and Post-Avant-Garde
Art’, Art Magazine, 1,
1994, pp 62–66. English
translation by Yannis
Goumas.
17. Survey group shows in
Greece have
paradigmatically favoured
generational groupings of
artists, posing explicitly a
unilinear tradition of
‘sons’ who ‘rebel’ against
the work of their fathers.
See for example E Ellenike
Zografike stis Arhes tou
Eikostou Aiona [Greek
Painting at the Beginning
of the Twentieth Century],
Rhodes Municipal Gallery,
Rhodes 1993, exhibition
catalogue.
18. Efthymia Georgiadou-
Kountoura, ‘O
Symbolismos kai Alles
Taseis sten Ellenike
Zografike’ [Symbolism
and Other Tendencies in
Greek Painting],
Archaeologia-Technes, 57,
1995, pp 17–28.
19. In examining national
identity in relation to
gender through disparate
instances of social
practice, Joanne Sharp has
argued that ‘women are
scripted into the national
imaginary in a different
manner. Women are not
equal to the nation but
symbolic of it. Many
nations are figuratively
female – Britannia,
Marianne and Mother
Russia are figuratively
female.’ See Joanne P
Sharp, ‘Gendering
Nationhood: A Feminist
Engagement with National

251
Greek myths, especially if one considers the emergence of a feminist
movement in nineteenth-century Greece that endorsed the plea of women
artists and sought to posit women as historical subjects.20
Identity’, in Bodyspace:
Destabilizing Geographies
of Gender and Sexuality,
ed Nancy Duncan,
Routledge, London and
New York, 1996, p 99.
20. See my ‘Elements of a
Secret History: Women,
Gender and Art in
Modern Greece’, op cit.
21. Antonis Kotidis, ‘A Mirror
in Oblique Perspective:
Postlude Adaptations of
European Avant-Garde in
the Greek Art of the
Thirties’, Archaeologia-
Technes, 57, 1995, p 29.
Name of translator not
given. Also see Antonis
Kotidis, Monternismos kai
Paradosi stin Ellinike
Techne tou Mesopolemou
[Modernism and Tradition
in Greek Art between the
Wars], University Studio
Press, Thessalonika, 1993.
22. A Kotidis, ‘A Mirror in
Oblique Perspective:
Postlude Adaptations of
European Avant-Garde in
the Greek Art of the
Thirties’, ibid, p 32.
23. Ibid, p 30.
The major and complex cultural debates that took place in the
interwar period had significant repercussions for the course of modern
Greek art. Again, developments in the visual arts have been recorded by
art historical research as exclusively defined by the work of male artists
such as Ghikas, Tsarouhis, Moralis, and Engonopoulos.21 The human
figure provided a visually pliable referent for the politics of representa-
tion which now become more distinctly political: antagonistic tendencies
corresponding to ideological conflicts permeating a variety of discourses
from literature to the visual arts, most of which involved the notion of
‘Greekness’, involve the figure. Antonis Kotidis has rightly argued that
the latter becomes in the 1930s even more prominent than before.22 The
human form emerges as the site where frequently contrasting views
revolving around the idea of the nation are articulated. It is also the site
where modernism is being repeatedly subjected to the discontinuous
processes of localisation.
According to Kotidis, the Greek artists who returned to Greece from
Paris in the 1930s ‘realized’ that, in formalist terms, European
modernism said nothing that Byzantine art had not said before.23
However, it could be argued that this concrete realisation, as described by
Kotidis, was the dominant and historically prescribed interpretation of
modernism. The insistence on the division between form and content
allowed for a dual axis of semiotic value in Greek art: content referred to
the local and form referred to the West. Interpreting modernism in
formalist terms was a necessary act, a solution to the dilemma of having
to choose between the beyond-the-local, totalising discourse of moder-
nism and the ethnocentric ideals of Greek culture at the time.
Interestingly, then, the sign of the body in the 1930s becomes a space of
multiple, intersecting contestations: ‘conservative’ and ‘progressive’
forces within Greek culture, modernism and ethnocentrism, Marxism,
and the claims of the bourgeoisie. Modernism, viewed from the
perspective of its own margins, is not exclusively identified with human
emancipation while its claims to individual expression are not easily
assimilated within the presumably objective and collective demand for
national identity. Modernism in Greece functioned in terms of a
contradiction, proposing the effective erasure of the local/national (hence
of one of the main dimensions of identity) at the same time as it promised
to construct and prioritise the distinctly personal. The approach to the
figure was supposedly then based on a certain eclecticism (a response to
the contradiction), which has tempted some contemporary Greek art
historians to claim a postmodern angle in relation to modernism in
Greece. This view overlooks the fact that this eclecticism did not
constitute a visual discourse on the historically and culturally produced
fragmentation of the subject or any notion of micro-politics (postmodern
aesthetics is normally identified with the latter) but quite the opposite: a
visual discourse on a much desired unity of the subject which was to form
part of a nation’s cultural identity, despite the distortion of social
relations legitimised in its context. It was in this double context (of
modernism and of national discourse) that the experience of women
artists was silenced.

252
Furthermore, this visual discourse had an exploratory nature and its
capacity to encompass diverse tendencies was vital to the achievement of
its objectives. The introduction of the human figure into the geometry of
an abstracted, austere classical space in the work of Yannis Moralis was
to develop next to the unprecedented celebration of the male body by
Yannis Tsarouhis. Predictably, Moralis’s painting incorporated the
female nude as a flexible signifier in compositions where the erotic
impulse would become conflated with death, mourning and a general
sense of melancholy and dis-ease. In his endless ‘Funerary Monument’
paintings, femininity emerged as the state of a fragile balance between
love and death. The female body was not an image to be enjoyed in the
traditional voyeuristic sense; rather, its reification was articulated in
terms of an intellectual exercise for the male subject. In the cultural
environment that shaped this painting’s reception, the sign of the female
body functioned allegorically as the beautiful but inaccessible, because
gone forever, past of classical Greece to which the modern Greek subject
was morbidly but necessarily (that is, fatally) attracted. This painting
may, then, implicitly connect the image of the female body with the
sublime and the beautiful but it certainly did not displace the dominance
of the male (productive) subject in art. (Significantly, Moralis became
extremely influential teaching at the NSFA.)
The above discussion aimed to clarify that the development of
modernism in Greece involved the female figure as well. But it is the work
Yannis Tsarouhis, The Arrest or The Arrest of Three Communists, 1944. Coll: copyright Tsarouhis Foundation

253
of Tsarouhis (active from the interwar period to the 1980s) that can be
said to problematise the smooth incorporation of Greek modernism into
modernism proper. The painting of Tsarouhis, who remains the most
popular Greek artist in a national context,24 testifies to the different
terms negotiated for the body in Greece, primarily because of the
aforementioned effort to resurrect the classical and Byzantine traditions
Yannis Tsarouhis, Young Man in White or Young Man in White Linen Suit, 1937. Coll:
copyright Tsarouhis Foundation
24. The Tsarouhis Museum is
in Marousi, Athens. Irene
Florou’s PhD thesis
(University of Athens
1989) published under the
title Yannis Tsarouhis: E
Zografike kai e Epohe tou
[Yannis Tsarouhis: His
Painting, His Times], Nea
Synora – A A Livani,
Athens, 1999, constitutes
the most thorough
examination of the artist’s
work. However, it does
not depart from the
standard formalist analysis
of works organised
around a linear
chronological axis where
history functions as a
sequence of backgrounds
against which Tsarouhis’s
art is projected, although
she stresses that ‘in the
study of Tsarouhis, one
must not lose sight of his
homosexuality, which
provides the basis of his
work’, ibid, p 226.

254
and because of social conventions that at the beginning of the century
could not tolerate the female nude (and this was considered by some
Greek artists and critics as a major obstacle to the development of
modern Greek art).25
In the work of Tsarouhis the highly eroticised male nude did not
always comply with established ways of seeing the male body as the ideal
of classical antiquity, which brought it closer to the Renaissance ideal,
thereby asserting a link between ancient Greece and contemporary
Europe. He worked with male models: attractive young boys, sailors, and
generally young men – mostly of working-class origin – who would
frequent the coffee shops of Athens. In the eyes of his contemporaries the
painting of Tsarouhis captured the unique flavour of masculinity in the
spaces of everyday life and for many a whole era of Greek folklore has
been the essence defining the thematic core of his work. The celebration
of his work in Greek art history (and he remains highly visible in
curatorial and publishing projects to this day) is symptomatic of the
emphasis of the discipline on the development of an ethnocentric visual
25. See S Zografidis ‘To
Gymnon en te Techne’
[The Nude in Art],
Pinakotheke, October
1903, pp 148–9 and I
Dimitrakopoulos ‘E
Semnotis en te
Kallitechnia’[Prudery in
Art], Pinakotheke, January
1904, pp 218–19.
Yannis Tsarouhis, Copying Tiziano, 1971. Coll: copyright Tsarouhis Foundation

255
idiom. Tsarouhis’s homosexuality and its possible impact on his choice
and treatment of subject-matter has only been parenthetically
addressed.
The explicit eroticisation of the male nude in Tsarouhis’s painting
might be seen to introduce the possibility of a subversive reading of his
work since ‘it is too often asserted that for the male body to be the object
of a male gaze is disruptive to protocols of looking’.26 I would argue,
however, that this possible identification of subversive elements in the
work of Tsarouhis can be problematic. Tsarouhis remains the uncon-
tested master of the male gaze he is supposedly negating. His visual idiom
serves to support, rather than challenge, an intricate nexus of power
relations around the double axis of class and gender. Tsarouhis
frequently depicted his male models narcissistically positioned in front of
mirrors, passively reclining on beds or dancing in various homosocial
spaces (the coffee shop, the taverna, the military dormitory). In the
historical context that determined the reception of this work, what was
legitimised was a gaze in a discourse that marvelled in images of a healthy
masculine subject signifying a ‘healthy’ nation. Tsarouhis’s painting did
challenge the identification of the female body with the national ideal at
the level of representation but did not challenge the power of the male
voyeuristic spectator. Tamar Garb’s observation that effeminate male
bodies complement images or take the place of female bodies which close
off the male gaze cannot be ignored in a feminist reading of this work.27
In his Copying Tiziano the passive, young, sexually available male body,
abandoned in a corner of the studio, is starkly contrasted with the body
of the painter who actively learns from the ‘master’.
The working-class male body is offered to the gaze which disposes
nothing of its traditional attributes: nothing of the male, middle-class
identity of the spectator (and the artist himself in this case who came
from a wealthy, cosmopolitan background), to be more accurate.
Interestingly, the power of this gaze is asserted in duplicate: first, in the
case of the typically modern flˆaneur who explores the streets of the city
and records evidence of modern angst (though in the case of the Greek
flˆaneur, this plot gets complicated by the ideological underpinning of
ethnocentric references) and, second, in the case of the specific ways the
male body is introduced into the private/public space of the military
dormitory, the space of the studio or even the magic realist space where
attractive young boys are portrayed as ‘Spring’ or ‘Summer’. Roszika
Parker and Griselda Pollock’s claim that ‘in the twentieth century a nude,
if it is male, is ultimately a portrait only’, was perhaps too hasty a
conclusion.28 Precisely because in the codes of the male gaze, as
constructed in modernism, the eroticisation of the human form collapses
into the normative reification of the (female) body, it was difficult not to
subject any kind of sexual body (either male or female) to the semiology
of the female body as an object of desire. In the case of Tsarouhis, the
actively desiring body of the artist was also male – a confusing
identification of object and subject which made no sense in the
nationalist discourse where it was coded – and that is why it was
suppressed. I am not implying, however, that the artist’s conscious
intentions were suppressed, as indeed it is impossible to extricate here the
artist’s intentions from the ideological framework in which they were
negotiated. Tsarouhis did not set out to experiment with a potentially
26. Michael Hatt, ‘Muscles,
Morals, Mind: The Male
Body in Thomas Eakins’
Salutat’, in The Body
Imaged: The Human Form
and Visual Culture since
the Renaissance, eds
Kathleen Adler and
Marcia Pointon,
Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1993,
pp 62–3.
27. Tamar Garb, ‘Gender and
Representation’, in
Modernity and
Modernism: French
Painting in the Nineteenth
Century, ed Francis
Frascina, Open University
and Yale University Press,
New Haven and London,
1993, p 246.
28. Roszika Parker and
Griselda Pollock, Old
Mistresses: Women, Art
and Ideology, Routledge
& Kegan Paul, London,
1981, p 126.

256
subversive visual language that could challenge this antagonism between
desiring and desired body. In his effort to express the erotic potential of
the male nude, there was only one possible way: the feminisation of the
male form. His interest in working-class male bodies facilitated this
process.
However, the influence of Tsarouhis in postwar Greek art has been
of a far more complex nature. His persistent attempts to represent the
male body as the site of the spectator’s desire were appropriated
differently by social groups differentially positioned in power relations
determining cultural practices. In other words, Tsarouhis’s art operated
differently within the homogenising discourse of nationalism than in
relation to women’s practice at the specific historical moment when the
Women’s Movement made its claims in the late 1970s. Significantly, the
acceptance of the male form as an object of observation by female
painters in the 1970s and 1980s, which did not need to be defended
in terms of an explicitly feminist exploration/redefinition of masculinity
(as, for instance, was the case in Britain with shows such as Women’s
Images of Men at the ICA in 1984), would have probably been
impossible had not Tsarouhis’s painting demanded a particular horizon
of reception in the past. Nevertheless, the visual codes of a ‘different’
masculinity deployed by Tsarouhis did not bring about a concurrent
transformation of the visual codes of femininity. Nor did they lead to
an expansion of the male-dominated canon. In his overview of the
figure in modern Greek painting based on the Pieridis Collection (one
of the best-known private collections of contemporary art in Greece
open to the public), the art historian Yannis Kolokotronis notes that
the term nude designates both the female and male nude and yet his
text typically forges a unilinear tradition of male artists in the twentieth
century.29 One might want to ask why this clarification was necessary
in the first place. What is evident from the images included in the
catalogue is that Tsarouhis’s art has set the terms for the widespread
eroticisation of the male body by the male artist (and although this
may at first be seen as a peculiarity of the specific private collection,
a close examination of (post)modern Greek art would reveal a more
complex picture). This always involves the encoding of the male body
as an object of pleasure, usually in an iconography where elements of
neo-classicism de-historicise the particular bodies being depicted. The
potentially disruptive operation of both the artist’s and the viewer’s
identity as homosexual is ultimately negated by the incorporation of
such works in the discourses of a national art.30
Nevertheless, in the last quarter of the twentieth century women
artists turned to the male body but the kind of spectatorship this act
implied remains contested. The operation of such a politics of specta-
torship becomes all the more evident in the case of Aspa Stassinopou-
lou, whose nearly exclusive focus on the male body in the 1980s was
exceptional – in the same way that Tsarouhis’s focus was. Stassinopou-
lou was among the radical voices that emerged in the intensely political
climate characterising the transition to democracy period after the fall
of the junta in 1974.31 Her work on the male body has been seen as
a turn to eroticism and pleasure that, for Greek critics, remained
unrelated, if not directly opposed, to politics. What was perceived as
a distance between Stassinopoulou’s 1970s political (read: conceptual)
29. Yannis Kolokotronis, O
Erotas ste Syghroni
Elleniki Zografiki [Eros in
Contemporary Greek
Painting], Pieridis
Collection and the
Municipality of Patra,
Athens and Patra, 1987,
p 25, exhibition catalogue.
The exhibition, held
during Patra’s
International Festival that
year, included one female
and fifteen male artists.
30. In some cases Tsarouhis’s
direct influence, as for
example in the painting of
Mihalis Makroulakis who
was taught by him,
operates as a legitimising
criterion for introducing
works where the male
body is presented as
explicitly erotic into the
normative canon of ‘art
about Greece’. This is how
Eleni Vakalo discusses
Makroulakis’s painting of
the early 1980s, without
any reference to the
construction of
masculinity in
contemporary Greek
painting. See Eleni Vakalo
(1983) O Mythos tes
Ellenikotetas [The Myth
of Greekness], Kedros,
Athens, 1983, p 116.
31. Stassinopoulou studied in
Paris in the 1960s and
lived in London during the
military junta of the early
1970s. On her return to
Athens, she became
involved with the Group
4 + , a group of artists
(most of them female)
who actively engaged with
art as a gendered practice
through curatorial projects
and conferences.

257
work and her 1980s male nudes fitted well in a discourse that, at least
implicitly, separated the political ‘abnormalities’ of the 1970s from the
return to art ‘proper’ (that is, an art in the service of a reinstated
individualism) in the 1980s. The historically determined reception of
postmodernism in the Greek art scene and the suppression of a feminist
politics of the body in the same context, as I have argued above, were
instrumental in displacing the very possibility of an alternative script
that would posit a narrative of interconnections even with regard to a
specific artist’s oeuvre. So, for all the emphasis on the individual, the
critics’ discourse affirmed hegemonic contexts of meaning –both
consciously and unconsciously, one might say.
In an exhibition catalogue text, art critic Haris Kampouridis talks
extensively about Stassinopoulou’s use of materials and the ‘brush-
strokes expressing a tense gesture’ while he claims that ‘the words
Rrose Selavy, which can in some instances be inscribed on the painting,
have no particular significance on the first approach’.32 A second
approach never takes place, although there is a passing but unclear
reference to Duchamp amidst references to a ‘harsh critique of realism’.
Regarding the male figure itself, both Kampouridis and Dora Iliopou-
lou-Rogan write about its symbolic use in terms if an ‘archetype’.33 For
Kampouridis especially, this is an archetype of masculinity giving ‘back
to man his original appeal – something which he has managed to lose
in Western society’.34
The proposition is interesting in that it negotiates an essential
masculinity brought into focus because of the female subject’s desire –
which has to be assumed/constructed here as heterosexual. Thus,
despite the mention of the symbolic uses of the male figure, it is the
reference to the personal that is established. ‘Her expressionistic
creations manifest her very own erotic ritual and make the relationship
with the image a specific and personal one’, we read.35 This reading is
marked by the inability of a dominant discourse to move away from
the polarisation between a desiring subject and a desired object. The
fact that the (assumed) desiring subject is now female, disrupting at
least the established codes of a century-old recorded exclusion in
modern Greek art, receives no attention. The emphasis is instead on the
object of desire itself, and the ease with which the male body is
accepted in this role would have been unthinkable had Tsarouhis not
provided an almost comprehensive treatment of this subject-matter,
already accommodated in a national, and at times explicitly ethno-
centric, art discourse. I would argue, however, for a more complex de/
construction of desire in Stassinopoulou’s work, one which takes
account of the complex gender references associated precisely with the
appropriation of Duchamp’s female persona by a female subject in a
particular historical milieu. If for Duchamp Rrose Selavy was, prima-
rily, a feminine ‘elaborate self-construction’ that had to be recorded
visually in Man Ray’s photographs and, secondarily, an ‘authorised
signature’,36 Stassinopoulou poignantly focuses on the second aspect.
In her work, the painterly inscription Rrose Selavy is a referent and a
signature on the pictorial plane. As such, it is an appropriation of an
appropriation, playfully pointing towards the difficulty to designate the
desiring subject, a fact which consequently problematises the existence
of a desired object. Stassinopoulou inserts her photographed male
32. Haris Kampouridis, ‘The
Imprints of the Nails’, in
Aspa Stassinopoulou,
Medoussa Art Centre,
Athens, 1988, unpaginated
exhibition catalogue.
English translation by S A
Seferiades.
33. Aspa – Paintings, Athens,
1990, unpaginated
exhibition catalogue.
English text by Dora
Iliopoulou-Rogan.
34. Kampouridis, ibid.
35. Ibid.
36. Amelia Jones, ‘The
Ambivalence of Male
Masquerade: Duchamp as
Rrose S´elavy’, in Adler
and Pointon, op cit, pp 30
and 28 respectively.

258
subjects into multiple layers of colour and her approach is more infused
with irony rather than being expressive of a nostalgic sentimentality
over a suppressed essence of masculinity. These are male nudes holding
guns which point nowhere in particular; contemporary naked men with
ancient Greek helmets on their heads; a linguistic sign (the Rrose Selavy
signature) lost and obscured in the random routes of dripping paint –
with their all too obvious references to the creative energy of the
masculine subject as celebrated in the history of art. In its specific
historical context, this obsessive reference to the male body is in terms
of a deconstruction rather than a reconstruction of an archetype and
the discourses that have nurtured it. And taking account of these
multiple masquerades, such a deconstruction occurs at the level of the
iconography but also at the level of the desiring subject itself – the
body of the painter.
A reading of this work that would not consider this obsessive return
to a specific subject-matter would miss an important element. But this
obsessive return does not constitute a ‘meaning’ in its own right.
Stassinopoulou and Tsarouhis are two artists whose work is charac-
terised not by a specific theme but by a specific attitude towards a sign,
taking advantage perhaps of the obsessions flourishing in the historical
moments in which they live – nationalism in Tsarouhis’s case, the
emphasis on the individual in Stassinopoulou’s postmodern conjuncture.
To assume this attitude to be the same, in a mere role-reversal
assumption, means to prioritise tradition as stasis (of meaning) over
history as an articulation of processes. This may to some extent be
reassuring but it is also undialectical.
What I suggest here is a belated feminist reading of a woman artist’s
engagement with the male nude. Stassinopoulou was one among those
women artists (Julia Gazetopoulou and Hara Kalaintzidou should also
be mentioned) who took issue with the male nude, and that is quite
important. The absence of feminist art history in Greece, for reasons
already outlined above, effectively meant that certain tendencies in late
twentieth-century Greek art never received the critical attention they
deserved at the moment of their emergence. This realisation poses
certain questions about what actually constitutes historical meaning in
art. If by ‘historical meaning’ we understand a recovery of the
meaning(s) prioritised by the dominant ideology in any one period and
context (and this posits an archaeological model of art historical
practice in a strong sense), then the reading I have proposed here is
problematic. It can be perceived as a projection of meaning that comes
from the future and is corrective by default (feminist art history has not
always managed to avoid this).37 What I have attempted to do,
however, is to bring into focus these historical processes which have
been eclipsed in readings offered in Greek art history and criticism so
far, arguing that feminist art history, especially when attending to the
particularity of case studies defined by an overriding principle (the
centre/periphery ideology in this case), can and should be concerned
not only with following the historical emergence of meaning but with
explaining the absence of certain meanings. Hegemonic meaning can
never be fully explained until the possibility of counter-narratives is
posed in the context of a dialectical reading of absences and presences.
And this requires a revisiting of history that involves a strategic but
37. In her reading of Suzanne
Valadon’s work, Patricia
Mathews has for example
argued that ‘we can never
know Valadon’s intention,
but the works themselves
emanate alternative and
subversive representations
of women’ (emphasis
mine). See Patricia
Mathews, ‘The Politics of
Feminist Art History’, in
The Subjects of Art
History, eds Mark A.
Cheetham, Michael Ann
Holly and Keith Moxey,
Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1998,
p 107. Although
apparently Mathews aims
to convey to the reader
the fact that meaning is
not about recovering
artistic intention (which
should itself be subject to
historical interpretation),
it is nevertheless unclear
what the choice of verb
suggests with regard to the
project of feminist
methodologies in the
history of art. Revisiting a
historical context to
reconstruct (radical)
meanings of difference
cannot be reduced to what
images ‘emanate’
according to the feminist
art historian, as her
subjectivity and desires are
also shaped within a
network of social and
ideological exchanges. If
that were the case,
meaning would be merely
subjective instead of
potentially open-ended.
Moreover, in this account
the work of art retains its
mythical status as the
object-origin, instead of
being seen as a relation in
its own right, to the extent
that Mathews states that
‘the critique begins always
with the work itself,
observing the issues it
excites . . .’, ibid, p 107.

259
legitimate rearrangement of the correlation of factors that ultimately
point to the existence of an extremely complex model of spatio-
temporal interconnections akin to a ‘totality’ rather than isolated
instances of parenthetical exclusions.
This is an extended and revised version of the paper I presented in the strand
‘Dislocated Modernities’ at the 27th Annual Conference of the Association of Art
Historians Making Connections, Oxford Brookes University, April 2001. It is based
on research I carried out for my doctoral thesis entitled ‘Gender, Geographies,
Representation: Women, Painting and the Body in Britain and Greece, 1970–1990’,
University of Reading 2000. I am grateful to the Greek artists and art historians who
provided me with archival material and discussed with me aspects of their work. The
possible shortcomings and omissions of the present reading are of course entirely my
responsibility.
