open space
107 an unfinished revolution in
art historiography, or how
to write a feminist art
history

Victoria Horne and Amy Tobin
The question implied in our title is more a clarion call, an open-ended research
enquiry that we have begun thinking about through a series of informal
research events. The first workshop, organised by Victoria Horne at the
University of Edinburgh, brought together postgraduate and early-career
researchers to meet and discuss the epistemological questions raised when
‘Writing Feminist Art Histories’. In response to a productive session that
touched upon a range of historical and contemporary historiographical con-
cerns, in May 2013, Kuang Vivian Sheng, Catherine Spencer, Kostas Stasino-
poulos and Amy Tobin arranged a second event at the University of York. One of
the primary aims of these workshops was to reflect upon the merits and
obstacles endemic to writing history from a feminist perspective. However,
equally important is the potential that these events offer for developing a
supportive and critical network of feminist researchers through a series of
loosely connected episodes.
In this brief exposition we attempt to explain the impetus behind the workshops
and situate this collaboration within a broader UK history of collective feminist
knowledge production, as well as in relation to the current critical demands of
feminism. In the sections below we explore the complex significance (especially
for feminist researchers) of analysing the form and content of art historical
knowledge production and its written traces, in order to acknowledge the limits
and exclusions of the discourse. This is a brief and focused article; however, we
believe that feminist scholarship must always begin as a commitment to the
broader political position rather than simply addressing internal disciplinary
concerns. In the conclusion, we therefore begin to indicate the challenge that
has always implicitly underscored feminist participation in the academy, but
which has certainly gained increased visibility since 2008; namely, the impact
of neoliberal agendas upon individualising the structure of research and
feminist review 107 2014
(75–83) © 2014 Feminist Review. 0141-7789/14 www.feminist-review.com

teaching. Can feminism continue to exist within the mainstream institutional
structure of the academy? Can we rethink these structures, without being reduced
to an ‘ism’?
the problematic: writing feminist art
histories
The renewed Euro-American women’s movement of the 1970s had unprecedented
effects within both the visual arts and academic spheres, and many feminist writers
re-presented art’s histories through a radical historiographical project that
interrogated the very bases upon which cultural beliefs about art were founded
(Nochlin, 1971; Gouma-Peterson and Mathews, 1987; Pollock, 1988). In particular,
over the past four decades, both feminist and postmodern enquiries have drawn
out the never fully clear distinctions between historical ‘reality’ and its literary
‘representation’. As historiographer Dan Karlholm has concisely stated:
[Art history] refers to a threefold phenomenon: a collective producer (the community,
institution, or discipline of art history) produces representations (art history texts, picture
compendia, etc.) of what is allegedly an actual history of art (or art history) that exists
beyond these discursive phenomena. (Karlholm, 2006: 12)
Karlholm’s emphasis indicates that the crucial problem for art history arises from
its inevitable failure to fully comprehend the moments of art’s production, and the
discourse must therefore maintain an illusory (or ‘alleged’) representational
truthfulness. Art’s past is consequently represented through a discipline of ‘art
history’ that obscures its own production and thereby naturalises its very
structures. Intervening at the point of production (the writing of art history) is
therefore essential to reconfiguring historical knowledge from within a feminist
perspective, and denaturalising its gendered assumptions. Feminist discourse is, of
course, not immune to this obscuration, and a constant process of self-
examination and self-critique (often initiated by collective work) is necessary in
order to critically assess the circulation of power across feminist knowledges.
Despite feminist historians’ profound critical engagement with the discursive
structures of the discipline, it is difficult to define a singular feminist approach
since feminism is not fixed as a particular methodology; rather, it is a strategically
adopted political position from which to write. Fundamentally, it is feasible to
state that feminism is concerned with exposing the ideological and socially
constituted powers that consistently (re)instate the feminine (and, particularly,
female subjects) as inferior, and which thereby produce gendered hierarchies
throughout every social space—crucially extending from this, intersectionally, are
relations of race, class and sexuality. However, consensus on how to translate
this theoretical understanding into historical practice is hard to reach. Perhaps this
feminist review 107 2014 an unfinished revolution in art historiography
76

disparity is attributable to what Dimitrakaki (2013: 4) has recently termed the
‘ideologically divided terrain’ of feminism. In accepting this description we must
acknowledge that feminism has developed differently and unevenly across various
places/times (due most critically to those relations of race, class and sexuality),
and it is only by understanding both the impact of these historical developments
and our writing of them in the present that we can assert the relevance of feminist
knowledge for twenty-first-century contexts. We know that collectivising knowledge
production can destabilise the belief in a singular, objective authority and offer
instead politically situated examinations of the past, but it also (crucially) allows
us to disrupt our own assumptions by staging an encounter between various voices
and positions. Feminist political content within historiography therefore simulta-
neously requires close attentiveness to the political forms of knowledge accumula-
tion and transference within the academy.
The majority of writers involved in producing feminist art history have emphasised
that feminism is not focused on adding to the existing narratives of a discipline
that (re)articulates masculinist knowledge and power, but should focus instead
on intervening within and recreating art historical narratives from an invested
feminist perspective. For example, Mary Kelly does not refer to ‘feminist art’ but
stresses the shifting position of art ‘informed by feminism’; Lisa Tickner favours the
‘feminist problematic in art history’; and, likewise, Griselda Pollock prefers
‘feminist interventions in art history’ in resistance to the more reductive ‘feminist
art history’. It is evident that a precise terminology is required to articulate the
political imperatives at stake in writing against the master narratives of art
history. A feminist art historical approach must not only write the history of its
women practitioners but also interrogate the representation of gender difference
historically, a task that may also contribute to our understanding of sex and
sexuality today.
These fluid approaches (of always becoming) provide both stimulation and
structural difficulties for those attempting to write feminist art histories, and such
questions regarding terminology, narrative and methodology recur frequently
across the literature. More recently, however, the public face of feminist art (in
‘blockbuster’ retrospective exhibitions, for example) has at times historicised the
previous four decades without due consideration of these debates. Hemmings’
(2011) book meticulously unpacked the narrative assumptions embedded in
feminist theory’s narration of its own past moments, and, drawing inspiration from
this study, we hope to make greater sense of how feminist art history has been
written and what these historiographical forms imply or occlude. Thus, the aim of
this research network is to discuss the difficulties and merits in encountering
the mutable strategies of feminist historiography and to collectivise this
epistemological challenge. According to Donald Preziosi, the discipline of art
history arose in relation to the consolidation of the modern European (white, male,
colonialist) subject (Preziosi, 1989). To challenge the power and authority of this
Victoria Horne and Amy Tobin feminist review 107 2014
77

rehearsed discourse, it is therefore necessary to rewrite the disciplinary script of
art history.
the model: collective knowledge
production
Such knowledge as British feminists acquired in the early 1970s was procured by our
forming reading groups and collectives, established in the radical tradition of workers’
self-help groups and feminist consciousness-raising. We formed reading groups to study
Marx, Lacan, and Foucault. We went to conferences organised by film societies in order
to come to terms with psychoanalysis. We read magazines like Screen, New Left Review,
and Red Rag. A combination of collective self-help and intellectual bricolage re-educated
a range of activists and intellectuals seeking the means to resolve the dislocation
between what was officially on offer as knowledge—be it of art, history or society—and
what we need to be able to say understand because of the crisis we were living through.
(Pollock, 1996: 17)
It is impossible for us to appraise feminist art history writing without considering,
and drawing encouragement from, the rich history of feminist collectives in the
United Kingdom. Although the WFAH initiative is not yet a fully fledged collective
enterprise, this is our ultimate ambition in organising these workshops and why we
have chosen to collaborate on writing this statement, learning along the way that
co-writing is far more difficult and time-consuming, yet more idea-sharpening
than writing alone. As Griselda Pollock describes above, in the early 1970s
collectives were formed out of dissatisfaction with the state of the discipline and
were founded on a pedagogical basis, their members seeking to simultaneously re-
educate themselves and produce innovative art historical knowledge. One such
group was The Women’s Art History Collective, established in 1973 in London by
Denise Cale, Pat Kahn, Tina Keane, Rozsika Parker, Pollock, Alene Straussberg, Lisa
Tickner and Anne de Winter. This diverse group was composed of artists, art
historians and critics, and grew out of a shared desire to ‘explore the relationship
between contemporary women artists and the special problems they face, as well
as the overall cultural role and position of women and creativity’ (Harrison, 1977:
3). By re-evaluating the historical construction of women’s art—usually cate-
gorised as craft-based, or entirely absent—the collective sought to restore women
to the art historical canon. Through this reintegration (and in relation to
contemporaneous theoretical and artistic activity), the collective developed an
understanding of the ideological suppression of gender endemic within the
foundations of modern art history. This critical re-evaluation of the form as well
as the content of the discourse of art history was eventually written up in the
individual or dual-authored papers and books of its members (Parker and Pollock,
1981; Tickner, 1988).1
feminist review 107 2014 an unfinished revolution in art historiography
78

Over the past four decades the shared and dedicated space of the collective has
consistently proved important. Although it is organised by anti-hierarchical
principles, the collective structure is a hybrid, functioning variously as a site for
consciousness-raising (The Women’s Workshop of the Artists’ Union) and artistic
production (the Women and Work Collective) in the 1970s, as well as a locus for
coordinating diverse events (Women’s Art Change) in the 1980s and as a framework
to organise academic interest (Feminist Art and Histories Network) in the 1990s.
Since the early 2000s many more feminist collectives as well as social media
initiatives have emerged across the United Kingdom, although, to the best of our
knowledge, no research initiative has been established to investigate the
historiographical concerns of feminist art history.2 In each context the collective
has provided a shared space of identification and investment to foster knowledge
production outside the governing principles of mainstream institutions.
Historically, feminist interventions in the history of art emerged differently in the
United States, where Linda Nochlin established an academically sanctioned course
researching women’s art at Vassar College in January 1970 and Muriel Magenta
launched an evolving programme of events, ‘Women-Image-Now’, at Arizona
College in 1974 (Magenta, 1987; Nochlin, 1994). In contrast, the UK initiatives
mentioned above were extra-institutional, taking place beyond the lecture hall or
formal curriculum. Because they were not rooted in the academy, the collective
model instantiated through these schemes articulated a fluid structure and
arguably demanded heightened commitment to both one another and the group.
These radically contingent spaces were forged to question and undermine the
institutional (gendered) paradigms of art history. However, the forms forged at this
moment did not become self-sustaining. Perhaps they fundamentally could not,
without the economic and structural support of the university; or perhaps they can
be thought of as transitory moments of critique and production that should not
evolve into established structures.
This issue of institutional complicity or critique is always problematic for feminism,
and perhaps never more so than in the currently conflicted environs of neoliberal
academia. In contrast to these precedents, our workshops were hosted and funded
by the universities in which we work, although this was only possible by keeping costs
extremely low and asking attendees to fund their own travel. As PhD and early-career
researchers, we framed the events as opportunities to forge connections and
critically engage with other scholars (at any level) as well as those working in the
arts more broadly. In some ways, then, these events corresponded with recent
agendas in higher education policy encouraging public engagement and research
with ‘impact’.3 However, we are also interested in analysing the reproduction of non-
hierarchical research collectives in higher education in order to question how
collectivity can remain an organisational model that fosters criticality, and how it
can provide a model for intervention rather than a perfunctory space for
dissemination. This is a theme we would like to explore in a future workshop.
1 Dual authorship has
been a strong point of
resistance in feminist art
history. Renowned pairings
include, for example,
Rozsika Parker and
Griselda Pollock, Norma
Broude and Mary Garrard,
Judy Chicago and Miriam
Schapiro, and Deborah
Cherry and Griselda
Pollock.
2 To paraphrase Tucker’s
(2009: 4) introduction to A
Companion to the Philo-
sophy of History and His-
toriography, in which he
clearly defines these con-
cerns: the philosophy of
historiography examines
the epistemology of our
knowledge of history, the
reliability of the methods
historians use to infer
beliefs about the past,
and is ultimately an
examination of our
descriptions, beliefs and
knowledge about the past.
Of course, in art history,
the visual is added to this
analysis.
3 Details of the ‘impact’
agenda can be found on
the UK Research Councils
website: http://www.rcuk
.ac.uk/ke/impacts/, last
accessed 31 March 2014.
Victoria Horne and Amy Tobin feminist review 107 2014
79

The collective model is not simply an alternative to mainstream organisations but
must be understood as a complexly intersecting instantiation of (feminist) form
and content. Collectives have consequently been structured by rules that
consciously define the group, allow discussion, and concurrently demand the
articulation and close interrogation of roles and responsibilities. The demands of
working collectively therefore parallel the theoretical and ideological debates
developing in the broader Women’s Art Movement of the 1970s. For example, the
proposition, ‘Should women depict the female body in their art and if so how?’ can
be aligned to ‘Should women’s organisations use power structures evident in
mainstream culture and how is this negotiated?’ In addition, demands that address
the exclusion and oppression of difference in the liberation movement are more
than evident in the maintenance of collectives. The gender focus of earlier groups
sometimes provided a locus for conflict, assuaging the analysis of racial, class-
based or sexual oppression. Instead of shared spaces of support and criticality,
debate was narrowed into gender opposition, which did not always recognise the
different investments group members had in the structures of power. By articulating
a network of participants, we hope to provide space for difference while also
encouraging critical approaches to political writing. Pollock’s characterisation,
above, of the collective as model for instituting new research through self-reflexive
interrogation reflects the demands of writing feminist art histories. The question is
how this can be mapped onto a much-altered cultural and pedagogic setting.
writing feminist art histories: 2010s
A loose trajectory of collectivity over the past four decades might notice a shift
from face-to-face collaborations to networks connecting participants across
distance. Writers including Boltanski and Chiapello (2006) and Sholette (2011)
have helpfully explicated the cooptation of network relations within the managerial
ethos of the (globalised) contemporary art world. However, although the
cooperative model has unavoidably been mimicked and commodified, collective
knowledge production can still be integral to the anti-hierarchal and pluralistic
project of feminism, assuming that we continue to (re)interrogate the form’s
usefulness, lest it undermine the effectiveness of feminist social critique. How can
we make the network form of collectivity work for us, ‘ideological neighbours’ living
across distance, today (Brown, 2012: 34)? One question we have struggled with, for
example, is whether the research collective could be based primarily online, or
whether it requires the affective benefits of gathering in person. Beyond the
historiographical research that forms the basis of our meetings, we also need to
probe the character and formation of our collectives: How are we connected?
Through what channels do we collaborate? Who do we include and exclude? We
must hold these questions in mind as we rethink the potential of the alternative,
fluid space a collective provides.
feminist review 107 2014 an unfinished revolution in art historiography
80

As women working in the academic sphere we cannot help but be aware of the
pressing quandaries arising from budget cuts and increased tuition fees. As
feminists, we feel it is necessary for our discussions to probe the limitations of our
department curricula (too often still teaching ‘feminism’ briefly as an optional
theory or method), the difficulties of organising across UK (or even international)
university departments and the problematic institutional complicity that each of us,
as wage-earners, is forced to assume. In the 2010s what is the role of a university
scholar? As the public face of feminism continues to gain currency (through online
protest, organising, and a constant stream of blogs and newspaper articles) what is
the relationship between public activism and intellectual enquiry, political agitating
and theoretical tools? Could we be accused of inverting the renowned WSPU slogan
to ‘words not deeds’? How can we make feminist art history work, rethinking both
knowledge form and content from a political position, while understanding that
scholarly work need not be instrumentalised in the pursuit of an end-goal? We hope
that these questions and many more will form the basis of future discussions.
The key issue in the WFAH initiative (following, for example, the trenchant research
by Hemmings, 2011: 134) is how we can better understand the theories and
methods used to write and remember feminist history—optimistically presum-
ing the importance of historical memory for a successful feminist politics of the
present, while acknowledging that ‘knowing how these narratives work does not
precipitate their transformation’. One issue that arose through our workshop
discussions and that exemplifies the challenge entrenched in feminist history
writing is that of narrative desire: as feminist art historians, do we hope to uncover
particular narratives embedded within a women artist’s work and/or biography
(struggle, heroic achievement, bravery, sisterly camaraderie), and are we
disappointed if our subjects (almost inevitably) fail to meet these high expecta-
tions? This is not to say that feminist art history is reducible to work of women
artists, but the political analysis of their art production can destabilise the
prevalent myths of conventional art history, particularly if addressing the inclusion
of intersectional subjects that are often occluded even within feminism. Jo Applin’s
research, delivered at the first workshop, looked at artist Lee Lozano’s boycott of
contemporary art and of other women, a profoundly troubling circumstance to
engage from a feminist perspective and one that cleverly contests the pleasure we
usually hope to find in our historical artistic subjects and their narratives.
It has been variously noted that, since the global financial crisis of the mid-2000s,
feminism has undergone a cultural resurgence. Yet particular scholars have
concurrently noted the limitations of this reappearance. McRobbie (2008) talks
about the ‘undoing of feminism’, as a superficial, masquerading feminism-as-
consumerism threatens to undo the core politics of the movement. Fraser (2013)
suggests that a ‘politics of recognition’ has thrived at the expense of a ‘politics of
redistribution’, and that this has allowed feminism to be reduced to identity
politics rather than destabilising broader systems of oppression. Although they
Victoria Horne and Amy Tobin feminist review 107 2014
81

employ different disciplinary grammars, McRobbie and Fraser reach comparable
conclusions about the displacement of politics in feminist discourses. Feminist art
historians in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s have been profoundly engaged in testing
the limits of art historical knowledge, working collaboratively to create a shared
space that pushes at the boundaries of the discipline. It is imperative that
feminism in the 2010s, while necessarily widely taught, does not become reduced to
an optional tool or methodology. One way, we believe, to stop this from happening
is to engage other scholars both intra- and inter-generationally within an informal
environment to discuss and interrogate our individual and collective motivations
for writing political art histories.
The ‘Writing/Curating/Making Feminist Art Histories’ conference took place at The
University of Edinburgh on 27 and 28 March 2014. Details on further events and
publications can be found at the research blog: www.writingfeministarthistory.
wordpress.com
acknowledgements
We are gratefully indebted to the advice of Jo Applin, Katy Deepwell and Angela
Dimitrakaki, all of whom commented on earlier versions of this article. Thanks must
also go to everyone who attended and contributed to the workshops.
authors’ biographies
Victoria Horne is a PhD Candidate and Teaching Fellow at the University of
Edinburgh. Her college-funded thesis examines the impact of feminist politics upon
the production of art historical knowledge across various institutional sites, and is
currently titled A History of Feminist Art History: Remaking a Discipline and its
Institutions.
Amy Tobin is a PhD researcher in the department of History of Art at the University of
York. Her thesis, entitled Working Together, Working Apart: collaboration, exchange &
the gift economy of Feminist Art (1970–1980), is focused on the intersections and
creative exchanges between British and American feminist artists, and is funded by
the AHRC. She is part of a working group on collaboration between the Courtauld
Institute of Art (London) and CUNY Graduate School (New York), and a recipient of
the AHRC’s Library of Congress International Placement award 2013–2014.
references
Boltanski, L. and Chiapello, E. (2006) The New Spirit of Capitalism, London and Brooklyn: Verso Books.
Brown, M.A. (2012) A History of A.I.R. Gallery: Feminism and the American Art Institution, PhD thesis,
Courtauld Institute of Art.
feminist review 107 2014 an unfinished revolution in art historiography
82

Dimitrakaki, A. (2013) Gender, Artwork and the Global Imperative: A Materialist Feminist Critique,
Manchester: University of Manchester Press.
Fraser, N. (2013) Fortunes of Feminism: From State-Managed Capitalism to Neoliberal Crisis, London
and Brooklyn: Verso Books.
Gouma-Peterson, T. and Mathews, P. (1987) ‘The feminist critique of art history’ The Art Bulletin,
Vol. 69, No. 3 (September): 326–357.
Harrison, M. (1977) ‘Art herstory’ MaMa: Women Artists Together, Birmingham: Ma Ma Collective,
Vol. 1, No. 1: 35.
Hemmings, C. (2011) Why Stories Matter: The Political Grammar of Feminist Theory, Durham, NC:
Duke University Press.
Karlhom, D. (2006) Art of Illusion: The Representation of Art History in Nineteenth Century Germany
and Beyond, Bern: Peter Lang.
Magenta, M. (1987) ‘Women-image-now’ Women’s Studies Quarterly, Vol. 15, No. 1: 56–57.
McRobbie, R. (2008) The Aftermath of Feminism: Gender, Culture, and Social Change, London: SAGE
Publications.
Nochlin, L. (1971) editor, ‘Why have there been no great women artists?’ in Women, Art Power and
Other Essays, Boulder: Westview Press.
Nochlin, L. (1994) ‘Starting from scratch’ in Broude, N. and Garrard, M. (1994) editors, The Power of
Feminist Art, New York City: Harry N Abrams.
Parker, R. and Pollock, G. (1981) Old Mistresses: Women, Art and Ideology, London and Henley:
Routledge and Kegan & Paul.
Pollock, G. (1988) ‘Feminist interventions in art’s histories’ in Fernie, E. (1994) editor, Art History and
Its Methods, London: Phaidon.
Pollock, G. (1996) Generations and Geographies in the Visual Arts: Feminist Readings, London &
New York: Routledge.
Preziosi, D. (1989) Rethinking Art History: Meditations on a Coy Science, New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Sholette, G. (2011) Dark Matter: Art and Politics in the Age of Enterprise Culture, London: Pluto Press.
Tickner, L. (1988) ‘Feminism, art history and sexual difference’ Genders, Vol. 3, Fall: 92–128.
Tucker, A. (2009) editor, A Companion to the Philosophy of History and Historiography, Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell.
doi:10.1057/fr.2014.7
Victoria Horne and Amy Tobin feminist review 107 2014
83
