PERISKOP  NR. 27  2022
127
PERISKOP  NR. 27  2022
126
Art History’s Feminist Emergency
Kerry Greaves
Art History’s Feminist 
Emergency
Kerry Greaves
Over the last decade, as the disputes surrounding socially 
engaged art have been historicized, the repercussions of 
the 2008 financial crisis have hit, and the global circuitry 
of biennials and art fairs has peaked, not to mention 
the crises brought on by Black Lives Matter, far right 
nationalisms, and now a global pandemic, there has 
been a renewed urgency regarding the relevance—and 
precarity—of art history as a discipline (Grant and Price 
2020, Joselit 2020, Petrovich 2020, Mirzoeff 2020, 
Bishop 2020). Like art history, feminism, too, finds 
itself at a crossroads and facing new challenges in a post 
#metoo but ever more highly segregated global economy, 
which was recently described at a major international 
conference as our “feminist emergency” of today.1 Both 
feminism and art history are independent, broad fields 
encompassing a range of ideas and approaches. As art 
historians Victoria Horne and Lara Perry have empha­
sized, if feminism “designates political organizing and 
activities aimed towards transforming the asymmetrical 
gendered relations that structure historical, legal, 
economic and social systems,” art history addresses 
historical and contemporary cultural practices, especially 
those dealing with art production, the market, criticism, 
and institutions (2017, 2). Their different aims aside, femi­
nism and feminist theory have long struggled to maintain 
a degree of agency within art history. After the so-called 
“second wave” feminist movement infiltrated the disci­
pline in the 1970s and 1980s, a certain taking for granted 
has haunted feminism’s position within art history, a 
phenomenon several scholars have recently sought to 
elucidate (Dimitrakaki and Perry 2015, Grant 2011, Horne 
and Perry 2017). While informative and necessary, none 
of these investigations consider the Nordic region. 
Taking these issues into account, this article contem­
plates my research of the last four years within the Nordic 
context to explore how and why feminism has been rela­
tively left out of the deliberations concerning the state of 
art history today.2 I address what I see as the paradigmatic 
feminist double-bind within art history: a dual tension 
between feminism’s status as historical movement and 
tendency to be historicized, versus its function as criti­
cal theory and activism, by looking at the Danish case. 
Drawing upon the identification of some larger patterns 
within Danish art history and the detailed problemat­
ics of feminist art history’s double bind, I argue that 
feminism is germane to art history—and to its future. By 
reflecting on a recent feminist art historical endeavor, the 
international conference Fast Forward: Women in Euro­
pean Art, 1970-Present at Louisiana Museum of Modern 
Art, the following offers some ideas on how a feminist art 
historical approach can make a constructive and crucial 
contribution to the field and the issues it faces today. 
Waves and (re)surfacing 
During the emergence of feminism as an organized social 
and political movement in the Nordic countries in the 
latter half of the 1970s, feminist art and art made by women 
generally aligned with wider international developments, 
in which gender difference became a crucial category in 
the creating and understanding of art, and artists focused 
primarily on issues of visibility, activism, performance, 
and the female body. Like their counterparts in the United 
States and Europe, Danish artists such as Ursula Reuter 
Christiansen (b. 1943), Kirsten Justesen (b. 1943), Lene 
Adler Petersen (b. 1944), and Jytte Rex’s (b. 1942) critical 
engagement with feminism informed their expansion 
of traditional forms of artistic media, processes, exhibi­
tions, and training. This engagement also led to a radical 
rethinking of issues related to representation, identity, 
and sexuality both within and outside the art world. With 
their artwork and cultural activism, these artists and their 
colleagues also organized and partook in, among others, 
two landmark feminist interventions into Danish culture: 
Damebilleder (Images of Women), 1970 [1]—one of the 
first feminist exhibitions in the world—and Kvindeudstill­
ingen XX (Women’s Exhibition XX), 1975, a festival-like 
showcase that featured readings, discussions, and works 
by international and local artists and non-artists alike.3 
[1] The Camp tableaux from the exhibition Damebilleder, 
10-24 April 1970, Rådskælderen, the Royal Academy of Fine 
Arts, and Trefoldigheden, Den Frie Udstilling, Copenhagen. 
Pictured are the artists Birgitte Skjold Jensen, Jytte Rex, 
Marie Bille, Rikke Diemer, Lene Bille, Kirsten Dufour, and 
their children.

PERISKOP  NR. 27  2022
129
PERISKOP  NR. 27  2022
128
Art History’s Feminist Emergency
Kerry Greaves
The activism, art works, and exhibitions produced 
during the “second wave” feminist period in Denmark 
were well documented, which has come in handy for the 
relatively few but important art historical revisitations 
in the literature.4 The first moment when this occurred 
was around the early 2000s, and then again about ten 
years later. Two of the most important examples are View: 
Feminist Strategies in Danish Visual Art (2004), produced 
by the artists’ collective Women Down the Pub, and a 
major retrospective exhibition at the Statens Museum 
for Kunst, What’s Happening?, 2015 [2], and its catalogue. 
These feminist interventions into art history and the art 
museum have been accompanied by a handful of volumes 
that either took the form of thematic journal issues seek­
ing to introduce international feminist art theory to the 
Danish context (Vest Hansen 1999, Jørgensen 2003) or 
assessments of the local artistic landscape in feminist and 
representational terms (Høyer Hansen 2005, Jørgensen 
2015).
Despite the groundbreaking work done by women 
artists in Denmark in the 1970s and 1980s and the few 
significant critical studies that address feminist art in 
the local context in the decades thereafter, a more sus­
tained critical dialogue about the issues they provoked 
[2] Installation shot of the recreation 
of Damebilleder in the exhibition 
What’s Happening?, 25 March-
2 August 2015, curated by 
Birgitte Anderberg at the Statens 
Museum for Kunst, Copenhagen.
did not occur. What is notable is the way in which such 
art historical attention to the subject seems to resurface 
periodically but not consistently. In Denmark, this was 
originally at the time in the 1970s and 1980s, then at the 
turn of the 2000s, then about a decade later, each time 
with a new generation of art historians becoming aware 
of art history’s feminist currents. But while each genera­
tion grappled with issues of visibility and representation, 
there was no wider, sustained attention and impact.
The sporadic attention to feminism and art made by 
women in Danish art history over the last fifty years is 
borne out by the numbers. In Denmark, several studies 
have attested to the lack of impact of feminist activism on 
reshaping art institutions. In 2005, a Ministry of Culture 
report documented that 80% of the artworks by living 
artists acquired by the seven state-owned Danish art 
museums from 1983 to 2003 were by male artists, while 
95% of works purchased by deceased artists were by men 
(Redegørelse 2005 and Christensen 2016, 349-50). In 
2016, scholar Hans Dam Christensen assessed the repre­
sentation of women in Danish museums from 2005-2012. 
Even though more female than male artists trained in art 
schools during that time, the disparity of representation 
persisted: of exhibitions of living artists at Denmark’s 
National Gallery, the Statens Museum for Kunst, eight­
een featured men, with only five with women, while the 
sixty-eight major exhibitions it curated included only five 
solo shows featuring women (358). Despite the continued 
imbalance, little debate followed, except for the Danish 
state’s consultant board, Akademiraadet (Academy Coun­
cil), to advise museums not to be limited by gender but 
to aim to represent Danish art history in all its nuances 
(Christensen 2016, 252-53).5 In November 2019, the Asso­
ciation of Danish Museums (ODM) published the results 
of a study which showed that female artists accounted 
for just 22% of the works Danish art collections acquired 
in 2004-2019, and just 29% of solo exhibitions featured 
women artists (“Facts” 2020).6 
The lack of female representation in art institutions 
reflects a general inattention to the issue of feminism 
and gender inequality in art history and art criticism. My 
use of the surfacing metaphor above is deliberate: surfac­
ing provides a related yet distinct alternative to the wave 
model—a predominant framework for understanding 
feminism for decades—for thinking anew about feminist 
art history as it has actually unfolded over time. The wave 
denotes a feminism that consists of several forward mov­
ing, cumulative, regular, decisive historical moments. 
Surfacing, in contrast, conjures coming up for air after the 
wave has crested and troughed. Surfacing involves effort, 
oxygenation, rising up, survival, buoyancy, and being 
made visible while in constant danger of being re-sub­
sumed and made invisible again. Since the 1970s, Danish 
feminist art history has (re)surfaced, but only temporar­
ily and sporadically between wider silences. 
This pattern was already referenced by art historian 
Sanne Kofod Olsen in her 2004 View essay, when she 
lamented: 
Why we are sitting here in 2004 with the same dilemma 
we had 35 years ago is a paradox. The women’s move­
ment and feminism have shifted borders but, as 
regards to the writing of art history there is still a 
palpable disparity of representation of the sexes in the 
visual arts that remains inexplicable (196).
At the time of this writing almost twenty years on, and 
despite the efforts of the aforementioned texts and 
exhibitions, in Denmark the situation remains relatively 
unchanged.

PERISKOP  NR. 27  2022
131
PERISKOP  NR. 27  2022
130
Art History’s Feminist Emergency
Kerry Greaves
Feminism and art history/historiography 
What are we to make of this silence and resurfacing in 
a country that has built a national image out of gender 
equality? The problem is not simply a Danish or Nordic 
one, but present throughout Anglo-European art history 
and its related institutions. In their book Politics in a 
Glass Case: Feminism, Exhibition Cultures and Curato­
rial Transgressions, art historians Angela Dimitrakaki 
and Lara Perry document how over the past 40 years, 
as feminism has become more visible within institu­
tions, it has “lost its bite” and been unable to succeed in 
affecting sustainable change (3). One reason they posit 
for this is that museums and galleries tend to relinquish 
their responsibility for creating a comprehensive femi­
nist agenda, instead looking to external art historians to 
undertake the work for them (180). Reflecting feminism’s 
double bind of historicism and activism, my own experi­
ence with Danish art institutions similarly suggests that 
feminism presents a dual problem: it is either viewed as 
representing a dated and completed activist project no 
longer relevant for the art of today, or its activist asso­
ciations appear too threatening or alienating—something 
feminist art historian Griselda Pollock describes as a 
trauma—for institutions to attract their publics (2016).7
While Nordic art history’s feminist silences betray 
blind spots and missed opportunities in ways that reflect 
trends elsewhere, the Nordic case is still revealing for the 
field. If Nordic artists created radical feminist art and 
undertook subversive activist projects concurrently with 
their international sisters, they did so within the frame­
work of the welfare state, where gender equality and the 
common good have been upheld as longstanding national 
values. And yet, even within this seemingly favorable envi­
ronment, the equality for many women has been far from 
achieved, both within society at large, but also within the 
feminist movement itself. Feminist scholar Mia Liinason 
has recently illuminated the discrepancy between the 
image of Nordic gender eqity and reality. She has docu­
mented how Nordic goverments have capitalized on the 
idea of gender equality by constructing it as an essential 
national value: emphasizing women’s “abilities as car­
egivers and responsible actors (in the early 1900s), as 
self-realizing and emancipated individuals (in the 1960s), 
and as efficient and responsible actors (in the 2000s) 
(19).” In the process, gender equality was exploited as a 
neoliberal strategy for modernizing Scandinavian socie­
ties during the emergence of the welfare state. 
While the increase in Nordic women’s rights is unde­
niable and significant, Liinason highlights through 
intersectional analysis how notions of congruity, inclu­
sion, and difference, were (and are) used strategically to 
communicate a sense of well-being of the nation, while 
at the same time replicating other forms of exclusion 
and hierarchy that persist in excluding certain women 
not seen as desirable by neo-liberalism, such as migrants 
and ethnic minorities (2018, 4-11). Indeed, feminism has 
been increasingly criticized for repeating structures of 
exclusion and inclusion in terms of race, class and sex­
ual identity (Horne and Perry 2017, 4). And as feminist 
philosopher Nancy Fraser has argued in the case of the 
welfare state, the exploitation of gender equality in nation 
building is in fact a side effect of an increasing alignment 
with privatization, deregulation, and neo-liberalism 
(2009). These circumstances have also had an impact on 
art historical narratives and historiography in significant, 
but not immediately visible ways. Many of the feminist 
artists of the 1970s, for example, were Marxist in outlook 
and critical of the capitalist compromises of the welfare 
system, but their exhibitions and works have nonetheless 
been later instrumentalized as evidence of the success of 
liberal democracy (Greaves 2022). 
It becomes clear that within art history, the contours of 
the continued issue of gender inequality and feminism’s 
unrealized potential have been overshadowed—perhaps 
even partially caused—by the perceived image of the egal­
itarian Nordic welfare state. As a result, a disconnect has 
persisted that has prevented the radical and speculative 
potential of feminist theory and approaches from effec­
tively infiltrating the Nordic art world and its history. The 
resulting implicit view has been that there is little need to 
reconsider women artists in terms of their gender since 
they have already achieved equality and have been treated 
democratically; this has even generated the idea that gen­
der is a dépassé topic altogether.8 
Indeed, except for some notable exceptions by art 
historians such as Griselda Pollock and Dimitrakaki, the 
taking for granted of feminism’s role within art history—
as either historical moment or already completed activist 
project—has hindered feminist theory from being con­
sistently deployed as a vigorous approach within the field 
(2018). Historian Judith M. Bennett has documented how 
history has been problematic for feminism, arguing for 
renewed and sustained historical scrutiny: “feminism is 
impoverished by an inattention to history. By broaden­
ing our temporal horizons, we can produce both better 
feminist history and better feminist theory” (2006, 31).9 
These conflicting paradigms suggest that it is actually 
feminism’s history that holds the potential to reanimate 
feminism within art history. In their recent volume Femi­
nism and Art History Now: Radical Critiques of Theory and 
Practice, Horne and Perry have made crucial inroads in 
this respect with their call for rehabilitated attention to 
history and historiography to reactivate feminism in the 
discipline, and thereby, art history itself. They argue that 
a critical, sustained revisiting of feminist art history and 
its periodic absences is necessary if we are to begin using 
feminist theory effectively for addressing art and its his­
tories now: 
[The] critical and revolutionary feminist dimension 
enjoins us to look to the present and future and break 
with the patriarchal past; while the art historical 
process demands that we review and reflect on our 
relations with that which has gone before. […] to do 
justice to both impulses: to formulate a politics for the 
present and future, which acknowledges, but does not 
reduce us to, the past (2017, 2).
They continue: 
The writing of art history … emerged as a critical site 
for intervening within the production of modern 
subjectivities and related historical operations of 
dominance and exploitation. […] We must continue to 
ask how we can understand and write about the past 
and present of art in a manner that does not simply 
recuperate women and feminism to established 
circuits of meaning- and value-production. But this 
requires that as these circuits evolve, so should our 
tools (7).
These scholars provide a poignant reminder of the critical 
importance of actively addressing feminism’s history and 
its historiography as a means for realizing the activist 
potential of feminism and feminist theory to redress art 
history as a field—one that is capable of reflecting and 
critiquing the myriad global urgencies we are faced with 
living in the world today. In this respect, historicizing 
feminist art history is not a process of neutralization and 
distancing, but of empowerment and active engagement. 
It is a process that Horne and Perry describe as a “disrup­
tive renarration” that “aims to displace the viscous canon­
ical history that insistently coheres a singular sense of the 
feminist art movement […] to avoid producing corrective 
accounts, in favor of historical accounts that struggle with 
‘alternative ways of telling feminist stories’” (16).10 
When we write art’s history, we must do so in a man­
ner that self-reflexively acknowledges historiography’s 
double operation, in which history actively informs the 
present, while the present informs our understanding 
of history. Such attention, moreover, allows for a greater 
capacity for applying feminism, its histories and theories, 
as a presciently critical and activist tool for reapproach­
ing, rewriting, and re-theorizing art history as a discipline 
relevant to its present moment. 
Feminist futures
The above-cited concerns informing art history’s femi­
nist emergency were at the forefront of the international 
conference I organized in November 2021, Fast Forward: 
Women in European Art, 1970-Present at Louisiana 
Museum of Modern Art, Humlebæk. Produced as part of 
the research project Feminist Emergency: Women Artists 
in Denmark, 1960-Present at the University of Copen-

PERISKOP  NR. 27  2022
133
PERISKOP  NR. 27  2022
132
Art History’s Feminist Emergency
Kerry Greaves
hagen and its related Nordic Feminist Art Histories 
Research Network, Fast Forward unfolded with a specific 
understanding of feminism not only as a series of historical 
interventions, but also a critical position of unsettling, or 
experimental critical inquiry to challenge forms of repre­
sentation as well patriarchal power and its institutions. In 
building the program, I attempted to address and catalyze 
the ideas, spirit, and activities of earlier generations in a 
manner reflecting Griselda Pollock’s assertion that femi­
nism’s mission is to formulate a new political subjectivity 
in the world and creative space of difference that qualifies 
the project of democratization and emancipation (Pollock 
and Dimitrikaki 2018). Feminism thus functioned as a 
critical and speculative guiding force, even when applied 
to feminist history itself, and by necessity the conference 
included other marginalized modalities of identity such 
as class, race, ethnicity, queerness, and sexuality, with a 
focus on how these interact with structures of power to 
inform artists’ works, environments, practices, and iden­
tities. With such an intersectional attitude, it was there­
fore surprising when we were told by Louisiana staff that 
the original title of the conference, “Feminist Futures,” 
was too academic and alienating to draw a wide audience. 
Hence the original title, “Feminist Futures,” disappeared, 
and “Fast Forward” took its place. But the contents of the 
program nonetheless continued to reflect an emphasis 
on open-ended, creative, self-reflexive and concentrated 
close-looking, in contrast to speeding ahead. 
If a robust feminist approach remains rocky terrain for 
the art world, the very concept of “woman” is itself also 
problematic—the double binds encasing feminism and 
women, it seems, never end. The conference needed a 
concise and identifiable title, thus, “Women in European 
Art, 1970-Present” was chosen. But in doing so, there was a 
danger in uncritically grouping all (but historically white 
and educated) female artists together in ways that could 
be read as anti-feminist. We nevertheless understood the 
concept “woman” as women, plural and lowercase, not 
singular capital, and a signifier for multiple and shifting 
identities, even while acknowledging the word’s signifi­
cant limitations in being able to address every female, 
queer, lesbian, and trans woman. Indeed, as Pollock has 
shown, woman is not only biological essence, but a politi­
cal identity: to be a woman has different socio-political 
ramifications in society and her very presence calls into 
question and challenges the premises of the patriarchy at 
every level (Pollock and Dimitrakaki 2018). 
The conference sought to reconsider the generational 
framework of historical “waves,” which has been so deci­
sive for feminist art historical scholarship, to explore 
how the circulations and translations of this model have 
shaped art and its discourses and institutions across 
Europe since 1970. A range of twenty-one presentations 
and four keynotes reconsidered and introduced histori­
cal subjects and presented new research, methodological 
approaches, and issues in the form of theoretical con­
tributions, historical scholarship, curatorial work, and 
performances. The program, which also included exhi­
bition tours at both Louisiana and the Statens Museum 
for Kunst, was divided over two days with the following 
thematic sections: historical feminist foundations in 
Denmark; Pia Arke and Nordic colonialism; new/alter 
histories; migration, politics, and activism; feminist 
critical consciousness and invisibility, and feminism and 
inter/media experiments. Within each section, care was 
given to create a varied texture of disciplines, subjects, 
and approaches, alternating between performances and 
more standard academic papers. 
We felt it was important to open the conference by 
revisiting the canonical feminist works and interven­
tions of the 1970s with a session that introduced new 
ways of seeing them, as well as formerly unknown works 
such as an experimental short film by artist Mette Aarre 
(b. 1943). These presentations reinvigorated a dialogue 
with younger scholars working on more contemporary 
art, while also introducing Denmark’s little-known, but 
incredibly radical experiments to an international audi­
ence. One pioneering artist of the period even contributed 
when Ursula Reuter Christiansen screened her water­
shed feminist film The Executioner, 1971, after which 
she spoke at length about it and her experiences. Sev­
eral other conference presentations further emphasized 
the importance of historical engagement by critically 
reconsidering historical figures, works, and practices 
throughout Europe, as well as the nature of writing art’s 
histories itself, shedding fresh light on those arenas in the 
process.
Current acute problems relevant to art history now 
were likewise crucial to the conference, and we sought 
to apply the agitational impulse initiated in the 1970s 
to address issues related to Nordic (de)colonialism, 
(post)migration, ecology, and neoliberal labor, such as 
visibility, representation, Black identity, queerness, indi­
geneity, and activism. Some of the highlights of these 
sessions came from the artists themselves, such as vision­
ary Greenlandic artist Jessie Kleemann (b. 1959), who 
held the audience spellbound with her playful, critical 
performance exploring the function of Skibskiks (naggu-
teeqqat), plain biscuits with a long colonial history. 
Danish-Korean artist Jane Jin Kaisen (b. 1980), mean­
while, spoke about and partially screened her intensely 
moving 2019 film Community of Parting, which was 
informed by her participation in an international wom­
en’s delegation that crossed the border between North 
and South Korea and her ongoing commitment to com­
munities affected by war and division. Southern Sámi 
artist Carola Grahn’s (b. 1982) lively and mischievous 
reading from her novel The Journey (2020) transported 
the audience into the being of the nåitien (Sámi shaman), 
exploring an animated universe where every entity has 
its own consciousness but is connected to one wholeness. 
And Danish artist Henriette Heise (b. 1965) spoke about 
the politics of (in)visibility facing women artists and the 
facets of uselessness through a lyrical conversation with 
art historian Mathias Danbolt. 
The keynotes further reflected the dual historical/
activist aims of the conference, with captivating talks by 
Tania Ørum, Maura Reilly, Angela Dimitrakaki, and Ame­
lia Jones, who tackled no less than: the activist experience 
of the 1970s; a searing indictment on the international 
and Nordic art worlds’ lack of equality between the sexes; 
the instrumentalizing of feminism and conditions of 
gender violence and privilege within neoliberalism, and 
the problematic manner in which “woman” reinscribes 
the binary thinking that feminism seeks to deconstruct, 
respectively. 
The selection and experience of the contributions to 
the Fast Forward conference was an agonistic exercise in 
bridge-building, omission-addressing, silence-answering, 
and activist-historicism-activism. It reflected a funda­
mentally intersectional and dialogical approach that 
balanced a reflexive historical criticality in parallel with 
a determined reckoning with the art world’s perilous pre­
sent. Building on a special Nordic focus, the we attempted 
to create renewed discourse among various generational, 
racial, class, disciplinary, and national divides. As a vigor­
ous intervention into art history’s feminist emergency, 
the hope is that the conversations and dialogue it initiated 
not only create a fuller understanding of why feminism is 
crucial for art history’s future, but also how and why we do 
art and art history in the first place. 
Notes
1	
See “Feminist Emergency,” at Birkbeck College on 15 June 
2017. Last accessed 31 March 2022.  https://www.bbk.
ac.uk/news/feminist-emergency.
2	
These include the two research projects I have led: Other­
wise: Women Artists in Denmark, 1900-1960 and Feminist 
Emergency: Women Artists in Denmark, 1960-Present 
(both funded by the Novo Nordisk Foundation) at the 
University of Copenhagen and their main outputs thus far, 
namely the anthology Modern Women Artists in the Nordic 
Countries, 1900-1960, ed. Kerry Greaves (London and New 
York: Routledge, 2021), and the international conference 
Fast Forward: Women in European Art, 1970-Present at the 
Louisiana Museum of Modern art, 17-18 November 2021.
3	
For more on these exhibitions see Anderberg 2015 and 
Women Down the Pub 2004.
4	
In Danish art history in general, meanwhile, reassessments 
of women artists before 1960 are minimal. See my “Intro­
duction,” in Greaves 2021, 3-12.
5	
About the persistence of inequality see Hansen 2005.
6	
These statistics are consistent, despite some promising 
attempts to address the situation, including the 2020 
decision of the Council for Visual Arts in the City of 
Copenhagen to impose gender quotas on the purchase of 
art for the municipality. 
7	
According to Pollock, feminism functions as trauma 
because “it emerges repeatedly as a contestation of the 

PERISKOP  NR. 27  2022
135
PERISKOP  NR. 27  2022
134
Art History’s Feminist Emergency
Kerry Greaves
entire symbolic and imaginary orders of meaning and 
subjectivity. For this reason it is profoundly traumatic to its 
own core and potential subjects.” (2016, 27).
8	
For just one example of this, in the Norwegian context, see 
Åsebø 2021.
9	
Also cited in Horne and Perry 2017, 4.
10	
Here Horne and Perry cite Clare Hemmings’s study 
Why Stories Matter: The Political Grammar of Feminism 
(Durham & London: Duke University Press, 2011).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Agency for Cultural Heritage. 2005. Redegørelse for 
indkøbspolitikken 1983–2003 på syv danske kunstmuseer, 
1983-2003. Copenhagen: Agency for Cultural Heritage.
Anderberg, Birgitte. 2015. “What’s Happening? Art Between 
Experiment and Feminism.” In What’s Happening?, 8-96. 
Copenhagen: Statens Museum for Kunst. Exhibition 
catalogue.
Association of Danish Museums. 2020. “Facts: Representation 
of Female Artists in Museum Exhibitions and Purchases.” 
Association of Danish Museums, 19 November 2020. 
Accessed 28 November 2020. https://www.dkmuseer.
dk/nyhed/fakta-repr%C3%A6sentation-af-kvindelige-
kunstnere-i-museers-udstillinger-og-indk%C3%B8b. 
Bennett, Judith M. 2006. History Matters: Patriarchy and 
the Challenge of Feminism. Manchester: Manchester 
University Press.
Bishop, Claire. 2020. “Methods of Art History Syllabus.” City 
University of New York Graduate Center. Fall 2020. 
Accessed 1 October 2020. https://www.academia.
edu/44194368/Methods_of_Art_History. 
Christensen, Hans Dam. 2016. “A Never-Ending Story: The 
Gendered Art Museum Revisited.” Museum Management 
and Curatorship 31, no. 4: 349-68. https://www.
tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09647775.2015.11206
82.
Dimitrakaki, Angela and Lara Perry, eds. 2015. Politics in a 
Glass Case: Feminism, Exhibition Cultures and Curatorial 
Transgressions. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. 
Grant, Catherine. 2011. “Fans of Feminism: Re-writing Histories 
of Second-wave Feminism in Contemporary Art.” Oxford 
Art Journal 34, no. 2: 265-86.
Grant, Catherine and Dorothy Price. 2020. “Decolonizing Art 
History.” Art History 43, no. 1 (February): 8-66.
Fraser, Nancy. 2009. “Feminism, Capitalism and the Cunning 
of History.” New Left Review 56 (March-April): 97-117. 
Accessed 10 November 2019. https://newleftreview.org/
issues/II56/articles/nancy-fraser-feminism-capitalism-
and-thecunning-of-history. 
Greaves, Kerry. 2021. “Introduction.” In Modern Women Artists 
in the Nordic Countries, 1900-1960, edited by Kerry 
Greaves, 3-12. London and New York: Routledge.
Greaves, Kerry. Forthcoming 2022. “What’s Happening? 
Feminism, the Contemporary, and Curating in the Art 
Museum.” In Curating the Contemporary in the Art 
Museum, edited by Malene Vest Hansen and Kristian 
Handberg. London and New York: Routledge.
Hansen, Lone Høyer. 2005. Før usynligheden: Om ligestilling i 
kunstverdenen. Copenhagen: Gyldendal.
Hansen, Malene Vest, Kristine Kern, and Sanne Kofod Olsen, 
eds. 1999. “Kunst køn konstruktion” issue. Periskop 8.
Hemmings, Clare. 2011. Why Stories Matter: The Political 
Grammar of Feminism. Durham & London: Duke 
University Press.
Horne, Victoria and Lara Perry. 2017. “Introduction.” In 
Feminism and Art History Now: Radical Critiques of Theory 
and Practice, edited by Victoria Horne and Lara Perry, 
1-24. London: I. B. Tauris & Company, Limited.
Joselit, David. 2020. “Virus as Metaphor.” October 172 (Spring): 
159-62.
Jørgensen, Ulla Angkjær, ed., et al. 2015. “Kvinder i kunsten” 
issue. Passepartout: Skrifter for kunsthistorie 36.
Jørgensen, Ulla Angkjær 2003. “Køn & identitet” issue. 
Passepartout: Skrifter for kunsthistorie 21.
Liinason, Mia. 2018. Equality Struggles: Women’s Movements, 
Neoliberal Markets and State Political Agendas in 
Scandinavia. New York and London: Routledge.  
Mirzoeff, Nicholas. 2017. “Empty the Museum, Decolonize 
the Curriculum, Open Theory.” The Nordic Journal of 
Aesthetics 53: 6-22.
Olsen, Sanne Kofoed. 2004. “A New Art History!” In View: 
Feminist Strategies in Danish Visual Art, edited by Women 
Down the Pub, 196-99. Copenhagen: Informations Forlag.
Petrovich, Dushko. 2020. “Where Should Art History Go in the 
Future? As Survey Courses Change, the Past Evolves.” 
ARTnews, 28 July 2020.
Pollock, Griselda. 2016. “Is Feminism a Trauma, a Bad Memory, 
or a Virtual Future?” differences 27, no. 2: 27–61. 
https://doi.org/10.1215/10407391-3621697.
Pollock, Griselda, and Angela Dimitrakaki. 2018. “Feminism 
and Art Theory Now.” Lecture. Haus der Kunst. 
Accessed 5 December 2019. https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=Q5Ett_UsxZo. 
Women Down the Pub, eds. 2004. View: Feminist Strategies in 
Danish Visual Art. Copenhagen: Informations Forlag.
Åsebø, Sigrun. 2021. “Women Pioneers of Abstraction in 1950s 
Norway: The Balancing Act of Aase Texmon Rygh, Inger 
Sitter, and Gudrun Kongelf.” In Modern Women Artists in 
the Nordic Countries, 1900-1960, edited by Kerry Greaves, 
39-50. London and New York: Routledge.
