Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s MontrÃ©al
Joana Joachim
Canadian Journal of History, Volume 56, Number 3, Winter / hiver
2021, pp. 266-291 (Article)
Published by University of Toronto Press
For additional information about this article
https://muse.jhu.edu/article/841902
[131.152.231.233]   Project MUSE (2026-01-07 22:05 GMT)  University of Basel

Canadian Journal of History / Annales canadiennes d’histoire  56.3  © 2021
doi: 10.3138/cjh.56-3-2021-0017
Black Gold: A Black Feminist  
Art History of 1920s Montréal
BY JOANA JOACHIM
Abstract: The 1920s have been touted as the golden era of jazz and Black history 
in Montréal. Similarly, the decade is well known for the Harlem Renaissance, a key 
moment in African American art history. Yet this period in Black Canadian art his-
tories remains largely unknown. As a first step toward shedding some light on this 
period in Black Canadian art history, I propose to use what I term a Black feminist 
art-historical (bfah) praxis to discuss some visual art practices undoubtedly active 
alongside well-known jazz musicians and cultural producers in 1920s Montréal. 
This paper presents an overview of critical race art history and feminist art history, 
as well as Black feminist approaches to visual representation, to outline what might 
be considered four tenets of bfah praxis. Applying these tenets, I propose that a 
new art history may emerge from well-known art objects and practices as well as 
lesser-known ones. I posit that through a deliberately bfah approach, new mean-
ings emerge and the voices of Black women, even when obstructed by mainstream 
white narratives, may begin to stand out and shed light upon a variety of histories. 
This praxis aims to underline the subtext lurking at the edges of these images and 
to make intangible presences visible in the archive and in art history. I propose bfah 
as a strategy for more nuanced discussion of the work of Black Canadian artists and 
histories that have by and large been left out of official records.
Keywords: Black feminist art history, 1920s Montréal, Black Canadian art, Phyllis 
Wheatley Art Club, Coloured Women's Club, Negro Community Centre, Harlem 
Renaissance, jazz
Résumé : Les années 1920 sont généralement présentées comme étant l’âge d’or du 
jazz et de l’histoire des Noirs à Montréal. De même, cette décennie est reconnue pour 
être la Renaissance de Harlem, un moment clé de l’histoire de l’art afro-américain. 
Pourtant, cette période de l’histoire de l’art afro-canadien demeure largement 
méconnue. Comme première étape visant à jeter un peu de lumière sur ce pan de 
l’histoire de l’art afro-canadien, je propose de recourir à ce que j’appelle une praxis 
de l’histoire de l’art féministe noir (bfah) pour examiner quelques pratiques d’arts 
visuels qui furent inconstablement actives aux côtés de musiciens de jazz et de pro-
ducteurs culturels reconnus dans le Montréal des années 1920. Le présent article of-
fre un aperçu de l’histoire de l’art dans une perspective critique de la race (critical race 
art history), de l’histoire de l’art féministe noir, ainsi que des approches de féministes 
noires en matière de représentation visuelle, dans le but d’esquisser ce qui pourrait 
être considéré comme les quatre principes de la praxis bfah. En appliquant ces 
principes, je propose l’émergence d’une nouvelle histoire de l’art à partir des pra-
tiques et des œuvres d’art reconnues ainsi que celles qui le sont moins. Je postule 
qu’à travers une approche bfah délibérée, de nouveaux sens émergent, de même 
que les voix des femmes noires, même lorsqu’elles sont entravées par les récits dom-
inants blancs, puissent commencer à se démarquer et à jeter de la lumière sur des 
[131.152.231.233]   Project MUSE (2026-01-07 22:05 GMT)  University of Basel

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
267
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
histoires diverses. Cette praxis vise à souligner la présence dissimulée du sous-texte 
situé à la périphérie de ces images ainsi qu’à rendre visibles ces présences intangibles 
aussi bien dans les archives que dans l’histoire de l’art. Je propose la bfah comme 
stratégie de discussions plus nuancées de l’œuvre d’artistes canadiens noirs et de 
leur histoire qui ont été en grande partie exclues des archives officielles.
Mots clés : Histoire de l’art féministe noir, Montréal des années 1920, l’art afro-
canadien, Phyllis Wheatley Art Club, Coloured Women’s Club, Negro Community 
Centre, Renaissance de Harlem, jazz 
For some time now, I have been pondering a question — a frustrating, both-
ersome question: What would a Black feminist art history look like? When 
I first began reflecting on this issue, I came across numerous feminist and 
critical race art historical texts as well as several Black feminist texts — none 
of which relieved my intellectual itch. There seemed to exist no simple an-
swer to this question. While feminist art historians have long discussed the 
patriarchal nature of art history as a discipline, critical race art historians 
have underlined its inherent racism. And for their part, Black feminist texts 
discussed the importance of critical analyses of Black women’s representa-
tion, but almost exclusively in relation to popular visual culture.1 My stance 
is that the representation of Black women in art should itself be central to 
some of these arguments. Somehow, despite the clear desire among scholars 
in these areas to discuss the visual representation of women and Black sub-
jects, that is rarely the case. This article is my attempt to develop techniques 
for incorporating Black feminisms and art historical analyses.
The 1920s have been touted as the golden era of jazz and Black history in 
Montréal.2 Similarly, the decade is well known for the Harlem Renaissance, 
1	
Michael D. Harris, Colored Pictures: Race and Visual Representation (Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2003), 14; Patricia Hill Collins, Black 
Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment 
(New York: Routledge, 1990/2002), 67; bell hooks, Ain't I a Woman: Black 
Women and Feminism (New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, 2015); 
Beth Richie, Arrested Justice: Black Women, Violence, and America’s Prison 
Nation (New York: New York University Press, 2012); Patricia Morton, Dis-
figured Images: The Historical Assault on Afro-American Women, Contributions 
in Afro-American and African Studies; No. 144 (New York: Greenwood 
Press, 1991); Charmaine A. Nelson, Representing the Black Female Subject in 
Western Art (New York/London: Routledge, 2010).
2	
Sage Reynolds, “Toot Sweet: When Jazz Ruled Montréal,” Canada’s ­History, 
15 June 2018, <canadashistory.ca/explore/arts-culture-society/toot-sweet-
when-jazz-ruled-Montréal>, accessed May 2020; Dorothy Williams, “Lit-
tle Burgundy and Montréal's Black English-Speaking Community,” in 
The Canadian Encyclopedia, Historica Canada, 17 January 2020, <thecana-
dianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/little-burgundy-and-montréal-s-black- 
english-speaking-community>, accessed May 2020.

268	
joana joachim
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
a key moment in African American art history.3 Yet this period in Black 
Canadian art history remains largely unknown. Through my curiosity 
about what the Montréal “equivalent” of the Harlem Renaissance might 
have been, I propose a reflection on how what I term a “Black feminist 
art-historical (bfah) praxis” might reveal it. In order to think through the 
strategies that might constitute a Black feminist art history, I will look at 
the advantages and possible hurdles of three related frameworks: critical 
race art history, feminist art history, and Black feminisms. I also briefly re-
view the groundwork laid out by art historians and curators who came 
before me whose texts are examples of Black feminist approaches. Pulling 
from the areas listed above, I will identify and define guiding principles for 
bfah: four tenets that I hope will yield greater reflection and more refined 
tools over time. I then use the 1920s as a case study of how these tenets 
might be used to unearth more opaque slices of history by applying them 
to Black Montréal as an example. I explore how bfah could serve as an en-
try point for discussing the visual artists and art workers who undoubtedly 
lived and worked alongside key jazz musicians and cultural figures such as 
Myron “Mynie” Sutton, Lou Hooper, and Rufus Rockhead.
I.  BLACK FEMINIST ART HISTORIANS?
While the overwhelming majority of art-historical studies have generally 
overlooked Black women, there are scholars such as Judith Wilson, Lisa 
Collins, and Charmaine A. Nelson who have begun the process of dis-
cussing the representation of Black women in art history. Over the years, 
­Nelson, Collins, and Wilson have critically engaged with the representa-
tion of Black women in visual art. These scholars’ groundbreaking work 
is at the root of my current inquiries.4 They recognize the crucial impor-
tance of engaging simultaneously with both gender issues and race issues 
in order to fully encompass the meaning and impact the representations of 
3	
Bruce Kellner, The Harlem Renaissance: A Historical Dictionary for the Era 
(Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1984); Steven Watson, The Harlem 
Renaissance: Hub of African-American Culture, 1920–1930 (New York: Pan-
theon Books, 1995).
4	
Judith Wilson, “Getting Down to Get Over: Romare Bearden’s Use of 
­Pornography and the Problem of the Black Female Body in Afro-U.S. Art,” 
in Black Popular Culture, ed. Michele Wallace and Gina Dent (Seattle: Bay 
Press, 1992), 112–22; Lisa Collins, “Economies of Flesh: Representing the 
Black Female Body in Art,” in Skin Deep, Spirit Strong: The Black ­Female 
Body in American Culture, ed. Kimberly Wallace-Sanders (Ann Arbor: 
­University of Michigan Press, 2002), 99–125; Nelson, Representing the Black 
Female Subject.

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
269
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
Black women in art. These women’s deliberate choices to focus specifically 
on Black women in the visual arts serve to counteract the erasure of these 
representations in art history. In doing so Nelson, Collins, and Wilson use 
their work to centre the narratives of Black women in order to rehumanize 
them and bring back what Avery Gordon terms their “complex person-
hood” – that is, to treat such subjects with dignity and respect.5 In seeking 
to complicate our understanding and reading of representations of Black 
women in art history, these scholars are working to bring these women’s 
stories to life. Within the framework of a bfah, these ways of thinking 
make it possible to discuss distinctly Black feminist concerns in analyses 
of representations that were never meant for Black women. As noted by 
Nelson, it is crucial first to understand the colonial context within which 
representations of Black women were produced in order to make an 
adequate assessment of them.6 By mapping out techniques for bfah, I hope 
to move this discipline toward what Patricia Hill Collins first called for 
in Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Em-
powerment (1990/2002) to develop a means for the empowerment of Black 
women through self-defined modes of knowledge production.7
II.  BLACK FEMINIST ART-HISTORICAL PRAXIS FOUR WAYS
Emerging from the context of Canada’s booming Black women’s art scene, 
I contend that the following techniques are possible tenets of bfah in the 
hope to carve out space within art history as a discipline for discussing Black 
women’s art production and representations.8 Despite increasing attention 
to race within art history, many scholars opt to place all Black subjects under 
the same umbrella.9 Historically, feminist scholars enacted a similar erasing 
gesture through their consideration of the category “woman” from a col-
our-blind and cisgender-centric standpoint. Thus, neither feminist scholar-
ship nor critical race scholarship adequately addressed the issues faced by 
Black women.10 Locating Black feminism in art history opens up the space 
5	
Avery Gordon, Ghostly Matters (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
2008), 5.
6	
Charmaine A. Nelson, The Color of Stone: Sculpting the Black Female Subject 
in Nineteenth-Century America (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
2007),  xviii.
7	
Collins, Black Feminist Thought, 221.
8	
Yaniya Lee, “The Women Running the Show,” Canadian Art, 2 October 2017, 
98–100.
9	
Nelson, The Color of Stone, xxii.
10	
The narrow categorization of gender as binary also contributes to the era-
sure of trans, genderfluid, and non-binary folks within such discussions. 
For more on gender as a spectrum see Trans Student Educational Resources, 

270	
joana joachim
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
not only for a critical re-reading of art histories but also to consider the mul-
tiple facets of Black women’s identities and experiences actively seeking to 
better their social standings in the ongoing struggle for equality.11
As Black feminist movements in the United States gained traction in 
the 1970s, feminist art historians increasingly began to engage with race 
in their analyses. Among their works, critical art historical texts speaking 
specifically to Black women’s experiences remain a minority.12 Black fem-
inisms have found their way into mainstream feminist inquiries nonethe-
less. These discussions, however, have become coopted and distilled to suit 
the purposes of “diversity” and “inclusivity,” resulting in Black women’s 
narratives being left behind once again.13 Michele Wallace, a Black female 
art historian, calls for specificity precisely because it simply is not possible 
“LGBTQ+ Definitions,” Trans Student Educational Resources, <transstu-
dent.org/definitions>, accessed 13 January 2020; and Mey Rude, “It’s Time 
For People to Stop Using the Social Construct of ‘Biological Sex’ to Defend 
Their Transmisogyny,” Autostraddle, 5 June 2014, <autostraddle.com/
its-time-for-people-to-stop-using-the-social-construct-of-biological-sex-to- 
defend-their-transmisogyny-240284/>, accessed 29 May 2020. For more on 
trans life and experiences through history see Leslie Feinberg, Transgender 
Warriors: Making History From Joan of Arc to Dennis Rodman (Boston: Beacon 
Press, 1996); and C. Riley Snorton, Black on Both Sides: A Racial History of 
Trans Identity (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2018).
11	
For more on Black feminisms see also Kimberlé Crenshaw, “Mapping the 
Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence against Women of 
Color,” Stanford Law Review 43.6 (July 1991): 1241–1299; ­Saidiya Hartman, 
Scenes of Subjection: Terror, Slavery, and Self-Making in Nineteenth-Century 
America (New York: Oxford Press, 1997); Richie, Arrested Justice, 125–55; 
Vivian May, “‘Speaking into the Void’? Intersectionality Critiques and 
­Epistemic Backlash,” Hypatia 29.1 (2015): 94–112; Collins, Black ­Feminist 
Thought; bell hooks, Black Looks: Race and Representation (New York/­
London: Routeledge, 2015; originally published by South End Press in 
1992); ­Thavolia Glymph, Out of the House of Bondage: The Transformation 
of the Plantation Household (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008); 
Joy James, “Radicalizing Black Feminism,” in Seeking the Beloved ­Community: 
A Feminist Race Reader, by Joy James (Albany: State University of New York 
Press, 2013), 47–65.
12	
Collins, “Economies of Flesh,” 99–125; Connor Garel, “Why Have There 
Been No Great Black Canadian Women Artists?” Canadian Art, 10 January 
2019; Monika Kin Gagnon, Other Conundrums: Race, Culture and Canadian 
Art (Vancouver: Arsenal Pulp Press, 2000); Lee, “The Women Running the 
Show”; Nelson, The Color of Stone, xi–xxxvi; Nelson, Representing the Black 
Female Subject;  Kymberly Pinder, ed., Race-Ing Art History: Critical ­Readings 
in Race and Art History (London/New York: Routledge, 2002); Wilson, 
“Getting Down to Get Over,” 112–22.
13	
James, “Radicalizing Black Feminism”; May, “‘Speaking into the Void?’”
[131.152.231.233]   Project MUSE (2026-01-07 22:05 GMT)  University of Basel

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
271
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
to discuss Black women’s position in art and art history in the same way as 
that of other women. Her statement reads as follows:
The key problematic among feminist theorists of colour in our debates 
around identity and “otherness” has been this notion of “and blacks too.” 
The insight of the most recent generations of feminists of colour has been 
that blacks (or black women or women of colour or black men) cannot 
be tacked onto formulations about gender without engaging in a form of 
conceptual violence. In no theoretically useful way whatsoever are blacks 
like women.14
In this statement, Wallace clearly rejects the recurring comparison that 
early white feminists made between the plights of women and the plights 
of Black people. She is calling for a direct and thoughtful engagement with 
the specific site at which Black women find themselves within society. It is 
crucial to examine the positions of women in general; however, these can-
not and must not be lumped together. Feminist art historical approaches 
that try to engage with race without recognizing that racism and anti-Black-
ness are in fact two distinct issues or that misogynoir — anti-Black racism 
compounded with misogyny — is a violence that only certain women face 
leaves Black women dangerously vulnerable to erasure once again.15
Rather than entertaining the notion of objectivity, which is considered by 
Black feminists to be an untenable intellectual position, these approaches 
consider embodied knowledge and everyday experience as crucial places 
of knowing that allow important insight in transformative justice work.16 
By operating from a standpoint of personal experience and knowledge, it 
is possible for Black feminists to pose questions that have yet to be brought 
forth and therefore to critique aspects of institutional practices and oppres-
sion that have hitherto remained undisputed. Black feminist approaches 
understand the compounded effect of both racism and sexism on Black 
women’s lives and that they are “linked to uniquely disparaging images 
of Black women’s sexuality, and [are] emboldened by the ways that state 
power controls opportunity on the basis of race as well as gender.”17
14	
Michele Wallace, “’Why Are There No Great Black Artists?’ The Problem of 
Visuality in African-American Culture,” in Black Popular Culture, Discussion 
in Contemporary Culture/Dia Center for the Arts, 1047-6806, no. 8, ed. Gina 
Dent, compiled by Michele Wallace (Seattle: Bay Press, 1992), 342.
15	
Collins, “Economies of Flesh,” 99–125; Crenshaw, “Mapping the Margins”; 
Morton, Disfigured Images, xi–xvii; Hartman, Scenes of Subjection; Collins, 
Black Feminist Thought; James, “Radicalizing Black Feminism”; May, “‘Speak-
ing into the Void?’”; Richie, Arrested Justice.
16	
Richie, Arrested Justice, 129.
17	
Ibid., 128.

272	
joana joachim
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
One of the foundational components of Black feminism is intersectional-
ity, a term coined in 1991 by Kimberlé Crenshaw.18 In developing this term 
for work Black feminists had been doing for years, Crenshaw provided a 
crucial tool for articulating the specific experiences they had been describ-
ing.19 In discussing intersectionality, Vivian May argues,
Rather than conceptualize group identity via a common denominator 
framework that subsumes within-group differences, creates rigid 
distinctions between groups, and leads to distorted analyses of 
discrimination, intersectionality explores the politics of the unimaginable, 
the invisible, and the silence. Intersectionality understands exclusions and 
gaps as meaningful and examines the theoretical and political impact of 
such absences.20
What Black feminists such as Crenshaw, Wallace, and May are arguing 
for is the need for us to understand and utilize intersectionality not as a 
means of labelling but rather as a way of doing.21 This means that feminist 
scholars must refrain from using intersectionality as a means of discussing 
various identities, as this undermines the true aim of this approach, which 
is to reconfigure the very foundations of our society to place Black women 
at its centre. If we turn away from using intersectionality as a means of 
labelling “diversity,” our attention then moves from who people are to what 
systemic oppressions they face. This paradigm shift, which Black feminists 
have been working toward for decades (if not centuries), is one that must 
also occur in art history as a discipline.22
The tenets of Black feminist theory underlined by Beth Richie provide 
useful insight into how a bfah approach might begin to take shape. 
Richie highlights interlocking oppressions, standpoint epistemology, 
everyday knowledge, dialectical images, and social justice praxis as key 
points in Black feminist work.23 By orienting these tenets toward issues of 
18	
Crenshaw, “Mapping the Margins,” 1241–99.
19	
Combahee River Collective, “Combahee River Collective Statement,” in 
Home Girls, A Black Feminist Anthology, ed. Barbara Smith (New York: Kitchen 
Table: Women of Color Press, 1983), <circuitous.org/scraps/combahee.
html>, accessed 9 September 2020.
20	
Crenshaw. “Mapping the Margins”; May, “Speaking into the Void,” 167.
21	
May, “Speaking into the Void”; Crenshaw, “Mapping the Margins”; Dent 
et al., “Discussion.”
22	
Though the term “Black feminism” had not yet been coined, the lives and 
the work of women such as Sojourner Truth, Harriet Tubman, Harriet Jacobs, 
and Ida B. Wells show the clear aims of placing Black women’s bodies and 
experiences at the centre of activist and changemaking work.
23	
Richie, Arrested Justice, 127–31.

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
273
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
visual representation and art, a new practice of art history may emerge. A 
Black feminist art historical praxis could centre around the following tech-
niques: (1) reclaiming the narrative through storytelling, (2) centring Black 
women, (3) focusing on the sociopolitical impacts of art and visual culture, 
and (4) employing alternative modes of knowing. These techniques make it 
possible to bypass traditional art-historical approaches to directly address 
issues impacting Black women.
Borrowing Wallace’s words, it is not enough for critical race and femi-
nist art historians to remain in the realm of “and Blacks too” — or “Black 
women too”— as this does little to solve problems of misrepresentation and 
invisibilization.24 As Beth Richie aptly notes, “A Black feminist analysis not 
only provides a much better explanation of the multiple dynamics of race, 
sexuality, gender, and class; it also accounts for the various forms of vio-
lence women experience and the multiple contexts within which it simulta-
neously occurs.”25 A fundamental aspect of Black feminist endeavours is not 
only to regain control over these narratives but also to work actively to dis-
mantle the systems that made this power imbalance possible to begin with.
Richie underlines that in order for this work to be truly effective, it must 
be aimed at producing tangible changes in the current condition of Black 
women’s lives and those of their communities.26 Moreover, she holds that 
“scholarly work should be in service to activism and that the beneficiar-
ies of research findings, policy recommendations, or theoretical insights 
should be those most affected.”27 Richie further contends that Black femi-
nist scholars’ work aims to challenge hierarchies, transform academic insti-
tutions, work toward a new form of organizational leadership, and revive 
grassroots activist efforts for social change.28 This is what needs to occur 
within the discipline of art history as well. Indeed, feminist art historians 
have called for such changes. As outlined by Norma Broude and Mary D. 
Garrard in the introduction to Feminism and Art History: Questioning the 
Litany,29 the goal of feminist art history is not so much the rediscovery of 
forgotten women artists. Rather, it is the more radical alteration of the disci-
pline’s methodology and theory by “experiencing in a new way the images 
and objects of the old art historical litany.” The representation and work 
of Black women in art requires a specific and intentional approach aimed 
24	
Wallace, “Why Are There No Great Black Artists?”
25	
Richie, Arrested Justice, 127.
26	
Ibid., 131.
27	
Ibid.
28	
Ibid.
29	
Norma Broude and Mary D. Garrard, “Introduction: Feminism and Art His-
tory,” in Feminism and Art History: Questioning the Litany, ed. Norma Broude 
and Mary D. Garrard (New York: Harper and Row, 1982), xiv.

274	
joana joachim
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
at not only discussing the ways in which they are represented but also at 
underlining and challenging the ways in which these images continue to 
impact their day-to-day lives. Pollock argues that
To discover the history of women and art means accounting for the way art 
history is written. To expose its underlying assumptions, its prejudices and 
its silences, is to reveal that the negative way women artists are recorded 
or dismissed is functional in the perpetuation of the myth of masculine 
creative superiority and social dominance. A central task for feminist art 
historians is, therefore, to critique art history itself, not just as a way of 
writing about the art of the past, but as an institutionalized ideological 
practice which contributes to the reproduction of the social system by its 
offered images and interpretations of the world.30
This very same notion can and should be applied to Black women in 
art history. Operating in this way takes the onus off Black feminist art 
historians to fit within the institution’s framework, making room for the 
transformative work that needs to take place. The responsibility then falls 
upon art history as a discipline to reckon with its shortcomings. Echoing 
­Nochlin’s early feminist critiques of art history, it should be noted that the 
issue is not to highlight or legitimize the work of Black female artists, nor 
is it merely to critique the ways in which Black women are represented. 
Rather, what needs to occur is a dismantling and reconfiguration of the 
very foundations of art history.31 bfah allows us to do this. Applying its 
tenets to an analysis of the art milieu in 1920s Montréal contributes to clos-
ing the gap in Black art historical knowledge of this period.
III.  “THE GOLDEN PERIOD OF MONTRÉAL’S BLACK HISTORY”
In the early twentieth century, Montréal’s Black community was com-
posed of a mixture of Black diasporic peoples, including Black Canadian 
descendants of enslaved people as well as individuals hailing from the 
United States and the Caribbean.32 Dorothy Williams notes that the period 
30	
Griselda Pollock, “Women, Art and Ideology: Questions for Feminist Art 
Historians,” Woman's Art Journal 4.1 (1983): 40.
31	
Linda Nochlin, “Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?” Art News 
69.9 (1971): 22–39; Norma Broude and Mary D. Garrard, “Feminist Art His-
tory and the Academy: Where Are We Now?” in “Teaching about Women 
and the Visual Arts,” special issue, Women's Studies Quarterly 15.1/22 (1987): 
10–16; Broude and Garrard, “Feminism and Art History”; Pollock, “Women, 
Art and Ideology,” 40.
32	
Dorothy W. Williams, The Road to Now: A History of Blacks in Montréal (Montréal: 
Véhicule Press, 1997), 43.
[131.152.231.233]   Project MUSE (2026-01-07 22:05 GMT)  University of Basel

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
275
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
between 1897 and 1930 marks the beginning in earnest of what we might 
describe as a Black community in Montréal.33 With further study into the 
history of free Black people during the period of slavery in Canada, other 
pockets of Black community may emerge.34 Further, Cheryl Thompson has 
underlined how the numerous portraits of Black individuals in the William 
Notman Photographic Archive at the McCord Museum serve to underline 
early aesthetic trends among Black people in Montréal in the late nineteen 
century.35 The early twentieth century is also a moment during which sev-
eral Black community institutions were created and would become pillars 
in the development of the city’s Black community.36 Williams notes that 
these organizations had one guiding principle: to help Black Montréalers 
survive the discrimination and isolation that they faced in city. She further 
underlines the 1920s were “the golden period of Montréal’s Black history, 
bringing the city millions in taxes on alcohol alone.”37 The 1920s are an in-
teresting period to look at to consider the potential of bfah.
Starting in reverse order of the tenets with alternative ways of know-
ing, let us consider the Black American art milieu of the 1920s, specifically 
the Harlem Renaissance, as a possible point of comparison. In an effort to 
move beyond issues of mis/under/overrepresentation to focus primarily 
on the political fallout thereof, the last principle of bfah uses alternative 
modes of knowing to tell stories that are ineffable by academic standards. 
As illustrated by the work of Saidiya Hartman and Marisa Fuentes, among 
others, using alternative modes of knowing involves turning away from 
accepted academic approaches to knowledge production and analysis in 
order to make legible that which may otherwise not be apparent.38 One 
33	
Williams, The Road to Now, 38.
34	
Frank Mackey, “Appendix I: Newspaper Notices,” Done with Slavery: The 
Black Fact in Montréal, 1760–1840 (Montréal: McGill–Queen’s University 
Press, 2010), 339–340, ads 94 and 94b; 79; Robin W. Winks, The Blacks in 
Canada: A History (Montréal: McGill–Queen’s University Press, 1971/1997), 
9; Marcel Trudel, Dictionnaire des esclaves et de Leurs propriétaires au ­Canada 
français, Cahiers Du Québec; Histoire, Cq-100 (LaSalle, QC: Hurtubise 
HMH, 1990); Marcel Trudel and George Tombs, Canada’s Forgotten Slaves: 
Two Centuries of Bondage (Montréal: Véhicule Press, 2013).
35	
Cheryl Thompson, “Black Canada and Why the Archival Logic of Memory 
Needs Reform,” Les ateliers de l'éthique/The Ethics Forum 14.2 (2019): 87–92.
36	
Ibid.
37	
Williams, “Little Burgundy.”
38	
Saidiya V. Hartman, “Venus in Two Acts,” Small Axe: A Caribbean Journal 
of Criticism 12.2 (2008): 1–14; Saidiya V. Hartman, Wayward Lives, Beautiful 
Experiments: Intimate Histories of Social Upheaval, 1st ed. (New York: Norton, 
2019); Marisa J. Fuentes, Dispossessed Lives: Enslaved Women, Violence, and 
the Archive, 1st ed. Early American Studies (Philadelphia: University of 
­Pennsylvania Press, 2016).

276	
joana joachim
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
way of accomplishing this is through the use of speculative language that 
embraces the ambiguity of the unknowable, or rather, the yet-to-be-con-
firmed, to sit in liminal spaces of knowledge.
Thus, my analyses consider lived experience and intuition, as well as 
haunting and affect, as valid sites of knowledge production. In articulat-
ing her epistemology of haunting, Gordon notes that “Toni Morrison’s ar-
gument that ‘invisible things are not necessarily not-there’ encourages the 
complementary gesture of investigating how that which appears absent can 
indeed be a seething presence.”39 Gordon’s epistemology of haunting, then, 
locates its analysis primarily within archival gaps, tracing their contours 
to reveal the presence of marginalized and erased people. She notes that 
“haunting is not the same as being exploited, traumatized, or oppressed, 
although it usually involves these experiences or is produced by them. 
What’s distinctive about haunting is that it is an animated state in which a 
repressed or unresolved social violence is making itself known, sometimes very 
directly, sometimes obliquely” (emphasis mine).40 In other words, haunt-
ing is an invisible presence, which cannot be overlooked, similarly to black 
holes or dark matter in the universe.
Along these lines, Christina Sharpe argues, “Living in the wake means 
living the history and present of terror, from slavery to the present, as the 
ground of our everyday Black existence; living the historically and geo-
graphically dis/continuous but always present and endlessly reinvigor-
ated brutality in, and on, our bodies while even as that terror is visited 
on our bodies the realities of that terror is erased.”41 Her formulation of 
“the wake,” much like Gordon’s epistemology of haunting, provides a 
necessary theoretical framework through which to consider the intangi-
ble ways in which the legacies of transatlantic slavery make themselves 
known in Black people’s quotidian.42 And so, as a Black feminist art histo-
rian, I operate with the instinctive knowledge that in those empty spaces, 
in those silences, live the histories of the Black women who came before 
me. My work begins with the understanding that the unknown historical 
silences are in and of themselves sources of information that must be con-
sidered with the same rigour as tangible archival documents. In the case 
of the 1920s, then, I consider the context of the Harlem Renaissance as a 
clue pointing to the visual art scene in Montréal, which is “not necessarily 
not-there.”43
39	
Gordon, Ghostly Matters, 17.
40	
Ibid., xvi.
41	
Christina Sharpe, In the Wake: On Blackness and Being (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2016), 15.
42	
Ibid.
43	
Gordon, Ghostly Matters, 17.

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
277
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
Given that, as noted by Williams, among others, many African 
­Americans made their way to Montréal for work and leisure, it might be 
worth ­examining the cultural contexts from which they came for some 
clues as to how Black people during this time were engaging with art.44 In 
his discussion of the 1920s, Richard J. Powell describes the period as one of 
interdisciplinarity and cross-pollination, identifying this decade as marked 
by “an ­international groundswell of Black creativity.”45 The author notes 
that ­Harlem, New York was at the time a key cultural site attracting writ-
ers, performers, musicians, and visual artists. More than that, he argues 
that the Harlem Renaissance specifically reached far beyond the bound-
aries of ­Harlem and had a global impact: “Like jazz musicians, the artists 
of the ­Harlem ­Renaissance era travelled and interacted, and their art was 
cosmopolitan, inspired by European modernism as well as the cultural 
groundswell of black America.”46 Artworks from this movement were 
characterized by an expressive use of bold colours in representational de-
pictions of Black people enjoying cultural activities, dancing, or playing 
instruments. Key concerns of artists during this time were to break down 
racist anti-Black stereotypes that remained prevalent in society and to em-
brace continental African folk art.47
Sean Mills for his part notes, “As the one major North American city 
to largely escape prohibition, by the 1920s, Montréal had acquired a rep-
utation for free-flowing alcohol, prostitution, and entertainment, and it 
44	
Williams, “Little Burgundy”; Williams, The Road to Now, 33–44; Sean Mills, 
“Democracy in Music: Louis Metcalf’s International Band and Montréal 
Jazz History,” Canadian Historical Review 100.3 (2019): 351–72; Dorothy 
W. ­Williams, Blacks in Montréal, 1628–1986: An Urban Demography (Montréal: 
D.W. Williams, 2008); Wilfred Emmerson Israel, “The Montréal Negro Com-
munity” (M.A. thesis, McGill University, 1928).
45	
Richard J. Powell, David A. Bailey, Gallery Hayward, Arts Institute of Inter-
national Visual, and University of California Press, Rhapsodies in Black: Art of 
the Harlem Renaissance (London: Hayward Gallery: Institute of International 
Visual Arts,1997).
46	
Ibid. On the international reach of the Harlem renaissance see also Brent 
Hayes Edwards, The Practice of Diaspora: Literature, Translation, and the Rise 
of Black Internationalism (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003); 
Michelle Ann Stephens, Black Empire: The Masculine Global Imaginary of 
­Caribbean Intellectuals in the United States, 1914–1962 (Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press, 2005); and George Hutchinson, “Harlem Renaissance,” 
in Encyclopedia Britannica, 17 March 2021, <britannica.com/event/Harlem- 
Renaissance-American-literature-and-art>, accessed July 26, 2021.
47	
Powell et al., Rhapsodies in Black; Nate Sullivan, “Art and Culture of the ­Harlem 
Renaissance: Artists, Poets, Authors and Music,” <study.com/academy/ 
lesson/art-and-culture-of-the-harlem-renaissance-artists-poets-authors-
music.html>, accessed July 26, 2021.

278	
joana joachim
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
would become a major tourist destination for visitors from the United 
States and elsewhere in Canada. The city was also coming alive with the 
sounds and syncopated rhythms of the new music.”48 This is so much the 
case that “In Montréal, the corner of de la Montagne and Saint-Antoine 
Streets came to be known as the city’s ‘Harlem district.’”49 The St. Antoine 
district at the time was predominantly Black and commonly frequented by 
African Americans, including hundreds from Harlem specifically.50 With 
this in mind, it becomes easier to imagine internationally frequented cul-
tural hubs such as the ones in Black Montréal neighbourhoods as potential 
meeting places for local visual artists, as was the case for musicians, writ-
ers, and dancers.
The next bfah tenet examines the sociopolitical context and impacts of 
art in the 1920s in Montréal. As Richie notes, “[o]ne of the most important 
contributions of Black Feminist theory is the notion of how intersection-
ality is relational, structural, political, and ideological.”51 For bfah, this 
involves a conscious recognition of the interconnectedness between visual 
art, social issues, and the misrepresentations that justify the mistreatment 
of Black women within a larger context as another key principle. bfah is 
geared toward consistently anchoring the past into the present to unpack 
the ways in which the meanings attached to Black women’s bodies through 
these images enact themselves in everyday events. This involves both ex-
amining the ways in which certain representational practices in art have 
concrete effects on Black women specifically and discussing longstanding 
issues from a contemporary standpoint. This includes considering how 
contemporary artists take up longstanding issues in their practice to com-
plicate our understanding thereof.
From investigating the sociopolitical and art-historical context of 
­Montréal during the 1920s, it becomes apparent that the city was earning a 
strong reputation in the fine arts milieu at the same time as its jazz reputa-
tion was being cemented. Indeed, the École des beaux-arts of Montréal was 
founded during this decade as it sought to further structure educations for 
the flourishing artistic practices of the time.52 The aftermath of WWI also 
impacted the art scene in the city as enthusiasm for modern art grew and 
the religious social order of Québec began to shift.53 Tracey Colett further 
48	
Mills, “Democracy in Music,” 354.
49	
Ibid., 356.
50	
Williams, The Road to Now, 43–44; Israel, “The Montréal Negro Community,” 
57.
51	
Richie, Arrested Justice, 129.
52	
Ray Ellenwood, Egregore: A History of the Montréal Automatist Movement 
(­Toronto: Exile Editions, 1992), 3.
53	
Ellenwood, Egregore, 9; Mills, “Democracy in Music,” 359.
[131.152.231.233]   Project MUSE (2026-01-07 22:05 GMT)  University of Basel

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
279
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
pinpoints Montréal as a crucial site for the development of modernism in 
Canada at large.54 This moment after the war prompted a “search for an 
identifiable Canadian art.”55
The 1920s in Montréal also yielded the Beaver Hall Group, a collective 
of roughly 20 visual artists comparable to Toronto’s Group of Seven for its 
modernist approach. The Montréal Group distinguished themselves aes-
thetically in their emphasis on urban landscapes and inclusion of human 
figures and socially in their inclusion of women.56 This group’s remarkable 
history presents another example of how (white) feminist art histories can 
at times be limited in their scope without proper racial considerations. In-
deed, the issue of Black women’s erasure can be raised in feminist art his-
torical scholarship, as it has historically treated race as mutually exclusive 
from gender. In 1971, Linda Nochlin’s article, “Why Have There Been No 
Great Women Artists?” marked the start of white feminist critical engage-
ment with art history as a discipline, not only to deconstruct its patriarchal 
foundations but also to take control over the narratives of women.57 Her 
contribution opened the space for several ongoing and crucial conversa-
tions around gender and visual art. This article also set the tone for feminist 
art historians to compare the plight of white women to that of Black peo-
ple, much in the same way it had been done throughout the Civil Rights 
movement. By making comments such as “The miracle is, in fact, that 
given the overwhelming odds against women, or blacks, that so many of both 
have managed to achieve so much sheer excellence, in those bailiwicks of 
white masculine prerogative like science, politics or the arts” (emphasis 
mine), Nochlin positioned women and Black people as separate catego-
ries that do not exist together.58 In positing an analysis of race and gender 
issues in this way, feminist art historians overlook the particular position 
of Black women in art history. The issue that makes feminist art historical 
54	
Tracey Collett. “Montréal: Its Role in the Beginnings of Modernism in Canada,” 
in Culture + State: Nationalisms, ed. Gabrielle Zezulka-Mailloux and James 
­Gifford (Edmonton, AB: CRC Humanities Studio, 2003), 77–83.
55	
Evelyn Walters, The Women of Beaver Hall: Canadian Modernist Painters  
(Toronto: Dundurn Press, 2005), 16.
56	
Julia Skelly, “Significance and Critical Issues,” Art Canada Institute, <aci-
iac.ca/art-books/prudence-heward/significance-and-critical-issues/>, ac-
cessed 26 July 2021; Walters, The Women of Beaver Hall, 11–20.
57	
Nochlin, “Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?”  22–39; Broude 
and Garrard, “Feminist Art History and the Academy,” 10–16; Broude and 
Garrard, “Feminism and Art History”; Pollock, “Women, Art and Ideology,” 
39–47; Joanna Frueh, Cassandra L. Langer, and Arlene Raven, New ­Feminist 
Criticism: Art, Identity, Action (New York: Icon Editions, 1994); Wallace, 
“Why Are There No Great Black Artists?,”  333–46.
58	
Nochlin, “Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?” 22–39.

280	
joana joachim
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
approaches inadequate for my purposes is the tendency to position femi-
nist issues in comparison to Black civil rights issues and to consider them 
to be mutually exclusive. When this occurs in concert with critical race art 
historical inquiries which discuss race irrespective of gender, the result is 
that neither feminist scholarship nor critical race scholarship is able to fully 
address the issues faced by Black women who deal with both sexism and 
anti-Blackness. Only Black women face the twofold violence of misogy-
noir.59 It therefore is crucial that art-historical approaches looking to discuss 
issues of race and gender underline this point.
Further, this bfah tenet underscores how the social fabric and very lay-
out of the city played a role in its art history. The Beaver Hall Group took 
its name from its studio at 305 Beaver Hall Hill, and all of the women in 
the group are said to have attended the Montréal Art Association (later the 
Montréal Museum of Fine Art), another key institution in the education of 
artists at the time.60 The artists in this group produced work focused on 
individual expression and city life, divesting themselves of the limits of aca-
demic training and of sexist stereotypes.61 Critics of the Beaver Hall Group’s 
work at the time drew comparisons between the Beaver Hall Group’s use of 
colour and rhythm and “the feeling when a certain kind of jazz, transported, 
furiously flings out the most resounding, noisy piercing notes.”62 Indeed, 
Mills notes that immediately after World War I “[writers] painters and danc-
ers shook the foundation of cultural establishments with their avant-garde 
art and political interventions. Jazz formed a part of this broader cultural 
renaissance.”63 It is important to consider how de facto segregation might 
also have affected the social settings of jazz and painting in Montréal. Both 
Bernice “Bunny” Jordan Whims and Tina Baines Brereton, jazz performers 
from Montréal, recall that Black artists were barred from performing “up-
town” near Sainte-Catherine Street West and Stanley.64 Mills notes that rac-
ism in the city was such that Black musicians were by and large barred from 
59	
Combahee River Collective, “Statement”; Crenshaw, “Mapping the Mar-
gins,” 1241–1299; Moya Bailey and Izetta Autumn Mobley. “Work in the In-
tersections: A Black Feminist Disability Framework,” Gender and Society 33.1 
(2019): 19–40; hooks, Ain’t I a Woman?
60	
Walters, The Women of Beaver Hall, 14.
61	
Ibid., 17; Skelly, “Significance and Critical Issues.”
62	
Paul Gessell, “All That Jazz: Beaver Hall Group Paintings from 1920s Show 
This Fall at Calgary’s Glenbow Museum. Galleries West,” 5 September 
2016, <gallerieswest.ca/magazine/stories/all-that-jazz-beaver-hall-group- 
paintings-from-1920s-show-th/>, accessed 26 July 2021.
63	
Mills, “Democracy in Music,” 359.
64	
Show Girls, dir. Meilan Lam, in National Film Board Screening Room (Montréal: 
National Film Board of Canada, 1998), <nfb.ca/film/show-girls>, accessed 
6 August 2020.

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
281
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
playing in venues on Sainte-Catherine Street west of Saint-Laurent, thus 
impeding their ability to earn income from the more lucrative areas.65 This 
is the very same area in the city where prominent art collectives such as the 
Beaver Hall Group and art schools were located. It is likely, then, that Black 
visual artists, like their musician counterparts, were barred from institu-
tions where they may have wanted to educate themselves or showcase their 
talents. Given the increasingly rigid lines of segregation being drawn across 
the city, these artists would have doubtless had to turn elsewhere. The ex-
periences of women such as Bernice “Bunny” Jordan Whims, Olga Spencer 
Foderingham, and Tina Baines Brereton are helpful cases to consider in re-
gard to how artists might have navigated the social context at the time.
IV.  THE WOMEN WHO STARTED THE SHOW
While archival and material evidence of Black visual art practices in ­Montréal 
during the 1920s is gravely lacking, new avenues of thinking and research 
arise with bfah. For decades, scholars have been discussing race and rep-
resentation in art history, critically engaging with the ways art has played a 
role in reinforcing racial hierarchies and racist ideologies.66 Indeed, Camara 
Dia Holloway notes, “[Critical Race Art History] acknowledges the role 
that race has played in culture ever since a biologically grounded concept 
of ­human difference coalesced during the early modern period.”67 These 
scholars understand and are intent on illustrating how race, art, and visual 
culture impact society at large and vice versa. They also understand that, as 
­Michael Harris astutely notes, “the one who looks holds power over the one 
who is looked at.”68 Given that racial classification operates first at the level 
of vision, images have the power of reinforcing or dismantling ideas about 
people and cultures.69 This is what critical race art historians, as Holloway 
65	
Mills, “Democracy in Music,” 358; Williams, Blacks in Montréal, 27–42.
66	
Peter H. Wood and Karen C.C. Dalton, Winslow Homer’s Images of Blacks: 
The Civil War and Reconstruction Years (Austin, TX: Menil Collection, 1988); 
Dent et al., “Discussion”; Kymberly Pinder, ed., Race-Ing Art History; ­Nelson, 
­Representing the Black Female Subject; Nelson, The Color of Stone, xi–xxxvi; 
­Freeman H.M. Murray, Emancipation and the Freed in American Sculpture: 
A Study in Interpretation (Washington, DC: Author, 1916); Albert Boime, The 
Art of Exclusion: Representing Blacks in the Nineteenth Century (Washington, 
DC/London: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1990); Camara D. Holloway, 
“Critical Race Art History,” Art Journal (2016): 89–92; Michael D. Harris, 
Colored Pictures; Gagnon, Other Conundrums.
67	
Holloway, “Critical Race Art History,” 89.
68	
Harris, Colored Pictures, 52.
69	
Joana Joachim, “Making Visible Black Bodies: An Interview with Dr. ­Charmaine 
A. Nelson,” Art/iculation (2017): 10.

282	
joana joachim
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
names them, aim to point out and dismantle. Art historians who critically 
reflect on race reject the notion that the visual arts are neutral and unaffected 
by social and political issues or ideologies.70 These scholars deconstruct rac-
ist imagery and call into question the ways in which Black people have been 
represented in visual culture for centuries. Critical race art history allows 
us not only to critique and deconstruct the racist ideologies as they present 
themselves in visual art but also to decentre whiteness to discuss issues of 
ongoing oppression and discrimination. The issue with critical race art his-
tory as presented by Holloway and as approached by many scholars thus 
far is the generalized disregard for gender as an important factor in these 
analyses. As noted by Nelson, the field of race and representation has long 
conflated Black men and women, thus erasing necessary gender analyses.71
Despite naming feminist insights as an influence on critical race art his-
tory, Holloway does not name the intersection between race and gender 
as also crucial.72 Without such discussions, art historians run the risk of 
upholding the falsehood of academic objectivity, which they claim to re-
ject in choosing to discuss race. Overlooking gender in an art-historical ap-
proaches perpetuates the erasure of Black women. Through this oversight, 
critical race art historians are, whether they realize it or not, reproducing 
the very practices that, like the historicizing of Black liberation movements, 
for example, centred on heterosexual cisgender Black men’s experiences 
and voices to the exclusion of almost every other Black voice. Race and gen-
der as presented in art and visual culture have historically had the function 
in society of regulating behaviour and spaces by reflecting who can and 
should do what, in which spaces. As such, they must be critically engaged 
in order to fully understand the particular regulatory forces that continue 
to impact the lives of Black women.
By decentering whiteness and including gender analyses, bfah prin-
ciples open up the possibility of considering exactly how visual artists in 
Montréal might have learned their craft and presented it during the 1920s. 
Using these principles, my investigation of the period highlighted a new 
question. If indeed the fact that the city operated under de facto segregation 
meant that Black artists were not welcome in “white” art galleries and ex-
hibition centres, where would they have gone? If such was the case, Black 
visual artists at the time may have instead presented their work in commu-
nity settings such as in church, in community centres, or in cultural venues 
such as jazz nightclubs. With these possibilities in mind, I have been able 
to find a few archival threads to tug on. Taking some cues from Yaniya Lee, 
70	
Harris, Colored Pictures; Boime, The Art of Exclusion; Holloway, “Critical Race 
Art Theory,” 89.
71	
Nelson, Representing the Black Female Subject, 2.
72	
Holloway, “Critical Race Art History,” 89.
[131.152.231.233]   Project MUSE (2026-01-07 22:05 GMT)  University of Basel

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
283
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
and employing the next tenet of bfah, I propose to look to the women from 
Montréal’s Black community to investigate the visual art scene at the time.73
In seeking to bear witness to invisibilized narratives, bfah is not con-
cerned with retelling white histories or rehashing white experiences. Rather, 
it actively casts them aside to create room for the histories that have been 
forced into the shadows.74 That is, this praxis centres on Black women by 
mindfully telling stories such as this one. Taking some cues from the likes 
of Nelson, Glymph, and D.G. White, the second core principle of bfah 
then involves maintaining specificity by forming its principal analyses and 
arguments around the lived experiences of Black women first and fore-
most.75 Much like Black feminists who have come before me, I stand by 
the fact that Black women face unique and multiple forms of oppression. 
This specificity also involves making clear the inherent difference between 
Black women and women of colour. In the words of Trudy (@thetrudz),
“Black woman” and “woman of colour” are not synonyms to be used 
interchangeably. “Women of colour” is a political identity of theoretical 
solidarity of non-White women because of the impact of White supremacy, 
racism and White privilege on non-White women. However, it is not also a 
racial classification in the way that “Black woman” is.76
Through this distinction, Trudy demarcates the nuance between racism 
and anti-Blackness, reinforcing the need for strategic focus on the specific 
socio-political and cultural position held by Black women in the world. 
This means that unless the issues being analyzed are related to dismantling 
harmful stereotypes, discussing anti-Black misogynistic violence, or under-
lining histories of resilience and resistance, they simply are not within the 
scope of a bfah analysis.
While Black men in Montréal were, for the most part, employed by the 
railroads, Black women in the city took the cultural lead.77 In the context 
73	
Lee, “The Women Running the Show.”
74	
Nelson, The Color of Stone, xxiii.
75	
Ibid.; Glymph, Out of the House of Bondage; Deborah G. White, Ar’n’t I a 
Woman? Female Slaves in the Plantation South (New York: Norton, 1999).
76	
Trudy, “Explanation of Misogynoir,” Gradient Lair, 28 April 2019, <gradient-
lair.com/post/84107309247/de ne-misogynoir-anti-black-misogyny-moya- 
bailey-coined>, accessed August 2020.
77	
Williams, The Road to Now, 33–36; Winks, The Blacks in Canada, 417; June 
­Bertley, “The Role of the Black Community in Educating Blacks in ­Montréal, 
from 1910 to 1940, with Special Reference to Reverend Dr. Charles ­Humphrey 
Este” (Dissertation, McGill University Libraries, 1982); Steven High, “­Little 
Burgundy: The Interwoven Histories of Race, Residence, and Work in 
­Twentieth-Century Montréal,” Urban History Review 46.1 (Fall 2017): 28.

284	
joana joachim
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
of 1920s Montréal, then, might it be that the people who were running the 
children's programs at the various key organizations serving Montréal’s 
Black community, such as the Coloured Women's Club (cwc), Negro 
Community Centre (ncc), and Phyllis Wheatley Art Club (pwac), were 
artists themselves? Were they people for whom visual art was important 
enough to want to instill in children? Organizations such as the cwc and 
the pwac appear to have been instrumental in fostering art practises of 
all kinds within the Black community in the city. The cwc, founded in 
1902 by a group of women whose spouses were sleeping car porters, is 
an organization that provided crucial services to the community, including 
moral leadership, psychological and emotional support, and help during 
numerous health crises.78 The cwc, like the ncc, also offered consistent 
arts and craft programming to the Black community.79 Founded in 1922, 
the pwac for its part became a hallmark of high achievement and a site for 
the development of talents and skills for large productions.80 Of the major 
community organizations founded at the time, the pwac seems to have 
been the only one founded with the express purpose to “focus attention 
of Blacks on their history and artistic endeavours” as well as to respond 
to other fundamental community needs.81 The pwac would later become 
the Negro Theatre Guild, of which I have found no record to date.82 This is 
where Canadian archival opacity becomes a major hindrance.
While Robin Winks identifies Lillian Rutherford as the founder of pos-
sibly the earliest art organization in Black Montréal history, no known re-
cords exist to reveal further details about her life, aspirations, and history.83 
Similarly, Maude Jones is identified repeatedly as a well-known and -loved 
arts patron in the Black community, yet the archive runs dry beyond a few 
basic details.84 Maude Jones was an African American migrant established 
in Montréal. She was a Christian Scientist and “relatively wealthy.”85 Jones 
78	
Williams, The Road to Now, 50–52; High, “Little Burgundy,” 28; Williams, 
“Little Burgundy.”
79	
High, “Little Burgundy,” 28; Bertley, “The Role of the Black Community,” 33, 
103, 139–141; Winks, The Blacks in Canada, 417.
80	
Williams, The Road to Now, 77
81	
Bertley, “The Role of the Black Community,” 41; Hostesses of Union United 
Church, Memory Book: Union United Church 75th Anniversary 1907 – 1982. 
(Montréal: Union United Church, 1983),  364; Williams, The Road to Now, 77.
82	
Winks, The Blacks in Canada, 417.
83	
The PWAC, later the Negro Theatre Club, predates the Black Theatre 
Workshop, Canada’s longest-running Black theatre company, by nearly 50 
years. “About BTW” Black Theatre Workshop, <blacktheatreworkshop.ca/
about/>, accessed October 2020; Winks, The Blacks in Canada, 417.
84	
Bertley, “The Role of the Black Community,” 33, 139.
85	
Ibid.; Williams, The Road to Now, 77.

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
285
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
was an advocate for social justice and an ardent support of Montréal’s Black 
youth.86 Jones’s passion for the arts and for supporting Black youth may well 
have been a key factor in Martha Griffith’s path. As noted by June ­Bertley, 
“She [Martha] developed her love and appreciation of poetry and recita-
tion, and acquired her deportment under Maude Jones.”87 Indeed Griffiths 
would later pass one these very skills, offering classes both as a volunteer 
and as an employee at the ncc.88 Her relationship with Jones and her expe-
riences in these community organizations seem to have been key factors in 
her life, as she recalled them multiple times in an interview with Bertley.89
It is undeniable that Montréal Black cultural life was impactful and in-
deed on a par with the Harlem Renaissance. As noted by Williams,
By the 1920s jazz reigned supreme in Montréal's nightlife. This city was the 
ideal North American location for a developing black identity focussed on 
jazz. Jam sessions went on into the early hours of the morning — Montréal 
was the jazz capital north of the border. In the midst of Prohibition many 
musicians from across North America have their start in Montréal, and 
some stayed to live and work in the city. As a result of Prohibition Montréal 
was the place to be.90
These strong echoes of the Renaissance in the Montréal jazz scene may 
also have been reflected in the visual arts. As such, it might be that the 
visual/aesthetic influences of Black Montréal artists included the Beaver 
Hall Group as well as the Harlem Renaissance. Black women’s involve-
ment in community centres was also a central component of the cultural 
life of Black Montréal. In collapsing the hierarchy between “high art” and 
craft, as would later become common in (white) feminist contexts, women 
such as Lillian Rutherford, Maude Jones, Martha Griffith, Bella Johnson, 
Ann Packwood, Mattie Wellons, and Irene Morris might also be seen 
as artists working in textiles and mixed media in a modernist context.91  
86	
Bertley, “The Role of the Black Community”; Williams, The Road to Now.
87	
Bertley, “The Role of the Black Community,” 141.
88	
Ibid. 
89	
Ibid., 139–41.
90	
Williams, The Road to Now, 44.
91	
The women listed here were members of the sewing and craft group hosted in 
the early period of the NCC. A photograph of their group is included in Ap-
pendix 12 of June Bertley’s thesis, “The Role of the Black Community,” 139–41 
and 193. Williams, The Road to Now, 77; High, “Little Burgundy,” 28; Charmaine 
Nelson, ed., Towards an African Canadian Art History: Art, Memory, and Resistance 
(Concord, ON: Captus Press, 2018), 1–43. For more on the history of feminism 
and craft as high art see Elissa Auther, String, Felt, Thread: The Hierarchy of Art 
and Craft in American Art (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010); 
and Julia Bryan-Wilson, Fray (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2021).

286	
joana joachim
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
Further, theatre and dance were extremely popular art forms in Montréal’s 
Black community.92 Taken up through the lens of bfah, then, what might 
it mean to begin to think about women such as Tina Baines Brereton, Olga 
Spencer Foderingham, and Bernice “Bunny” Jordan Whims as early Black 
Montréal performance artists?93 Here, the final bfah tenet could help shed 
light on this query.
In reclaiming the narrative, bfah aims to take control over how images 
representing and created by Black women are seen and discussed. This 
means restoring the agency of the Black women who are represented and 
telling their individual stories. For the purposes of this study, the terms 
narrative and storytelling are used interchangeably. Critical race theory rec-
ognizes that the experiential knowledge of people of colour is legitimate, 
appropriate, and critical to understanding, analyzing, and teaching about 
racial subordination. In fact, critical race theorists view this knowledge as a 
strength and draw explicitly on the lived experiences of people of colour by 
including such methods as storytelling, family histories, biographies, sce-
narios, parables, cuentos, testimonios, chronicles, and narratives.94 Pulling 
from the work of Daniel G. Solózano and Tara J. Yosso as well as JoAnne 
Banks-Wallace, my understanding of storytelling involves piecing together 
the lived experiences and personal histories of those whose presence is 
only marginally accounted for by the archive. Solózano and Yosso refer to 
this as counter-story, that is, “a method of telling the stories of those people 
whose experiences are not often told (i.e., those on the margins of society). 
The counter-story is also a tool for exposing, analyzing, and challenging 
the majoritarian stories of racial privilege.”95 Within the context of bfah, 
those counter-stories reside not only in the subtext of images but also in the 
social contexts in which these images belong.
As Banks-Wallace asserts, stories include both narrative, an account of 
a sequence of events, and dialogue, the way the story is told to impact 
its meaning. Storytelling through bfah can not only string together the 
lives of Black women visible in the archive but also change the meaning of 
the images analyzed by changing how they are discussed and perceived.96 
92	
Lam, Show Girls.
93	
Each of these women was a performer in jazz clubs across Montréal and was 
featured in Meilan Lam’s documentary Show Girls.
94	
Daniel G. Solózano and Tara J. Yosso, “Critical Race Methodology: Coun-
ter-Storytelling as an Analytical Framework for Education Research,” 
­Qualitative Inquiry 8.1 (2002): 26.
95	
Solózano and Yosso, “Critical Race Methodology,” 32.
96	
JoAnne Banks-Wallace, “Talk That Talk: Storytelling and Analysis Rooted 
in African American Oral Tradition,” Qualitative Health Research 12.3 (2002): 
417.
[131.152.231.233]   Project MUSE (2026-01-07 22:05 GMT)  University of Basel

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
287
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
More than that, as argued by Nelson, this also opens up the possibility of 
thinking through alternative viewers of the works in question. For exam-
ple, what would someone like Marie Thérèse Zémire, the sitter in Portrait 
of a Haitian Woman (formerly Portrait of a Negro Slave, 1786), have thought 
of her own portrait as an enslaved Black woman living in New France/
Québec?97 Thus, bfah falls in line with the long-standing Black feminist 
tradition of reclaiming narratives.98 bfah mobilizes storytelling to simulta-
neously make Black women in the archive visible and make legible visual 
representations of them. As posited by Banks-Wallace, storytelling also 
makes it possible to establish a relationship between the teller and the lis-
teners, thus reminding both parties of the similarities they share.99
Patricia Hill Collins and bell hooks, among other Black feminists, have 
noted the importance of representation in circumscription of Black wom-
en’s social positions. Stereotypes of Black women such as the mammy, 
­Jezebel, and the welfare queen have been key tools in the economic, social, 
and political subjugation of Black women.100 One of the crucial ways in 
which power is taken away from the oppressed is through the control of 
images.101 By taking control of images and the narratives attached to them, 
Black feminism aims to restore Black women’s access to self-­definition and 
empowerment both within and outside of the spaces we have created for 
ourselves.102 In this way, Black feminism allows Black women to move 
from being subjugated to being empowered individuals with agency in 
mainstream society.
As bell hooks states: “Indeed, a fundamental task of black critical think-
ers has been the struggle to break with the hegemonic modes of seeing, 
thinking, and being that block our capacity to see ourselves oppositionally, 
to imagine, describe, and invent ourselves in ways that are liberatory.”103 
Despite an ongoing recognition and critique of the power of images over 
97	
Nelson, Representing the Black Female Subject, 4–5, 21–25, 70–75. Portrait of a 
Haitian Woman (1786) is the earliest known representation of an enslaved 
Black person in Canada. The sitter, Marie Thérèse Zémire, was enslaved by 
the artist and his wife who lived in Montréal in the 1790s. The portrait is 
part of the permanent collection of the McCord Museum and is on extended 
loan to the Montréal Museum of Fine Art, where it may be viewed in the 
“Founding Identities (1700s-1870s)” section of the Quebec and Canadian Art 
galleries.
98	
Collins, Black Feminist Thought; Richie, Arrested Justice.
99	
Banks-Wallace, “Talk That Talk,” 411.
100	
Collins, Black Feminist Thought, 67.
101	
Ibid.; Harris, Colored Pictures, 14; hooks, Black Looks; Richie, Arrested ­Justice; 
­Morton, Disfigured Images, xi–xvii; Nelson, Representing the Black Female Subject.
102	
Collins, Black Feminist Thought, 67.
103	
hooks, Black Looks, 2.

288	
joana joachim
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
the lives of Black women, Black feminist texts that discuss these representa-
tions seldom mention art history, limiting their analyses to popular visual 
culture. This trend intriguingly mirrors (white) feminist scholarship, ac-
cording to Griselda Pollock’s comments. She states, “Indeed, from the 
inception of the women’s movement, one of the major targets of political 
activity has been the representation of women in advertising, cinema, pho-
tography, and the fine arts. Art history has a particular, if overlooked, role 
in all this.”104 Indeed, art history remains by and large off the radar of Black 
feminist critiques and thus continues to operate faced with few challenges. 
This is a problem because, as mentioned above, few feminist art historians 
or critical race art historians are paying much mind to the specific position 
occupied by Black women within the discipline. Black women are there-
fore left out of critical discussions on both counts. Although in recent years 
some art-historical work, such as that of Harris, Pinder, and Kin Gagnon, 
is actively seeking to bring race and gender issues to the discipline’s table, 
these efforts are being made in broad strokes that do not always account 
for the particularity of overlapping oppressions faced by Black women.105 
Issues pertaining specifically to the treatment of Black women in art get lost 
in the mix.
Through the use of storytelling, Meilan Lam’s documentary, Show Girls 
(1998), along with oral histories recording the period, points to a fluid 
boundary between cultural production and so-called “high art.”106 Case 
in point, in an interview with John Gilmore, former band manager and 
frequent attendee of shows in Montréal jazz clubs, May Oliver repeatedly 
described women’s performances as art.107 Within the context of segregated 
Montréal, someone like Olga Spencer Foderingham, a Black woman per-
former, for instance, states that “the only place [they] had in those days to 
really have a nice complete show was in a nightclub.”108 Just as Vanessa 
104	
Pollock, “Women, Art and Ideology,” 39.
105	
Harris, Colored Pictures; Pinder, Race-ing Art History; Kin Gagnon, Other 
Conundrums.
106	
Show Girls bears witness to Montréal's Black jazz scene from the 1920s to the 
1960s. It includes images of archival material as well as oral history inter-
views with members of the community including Tina Baines Brereton, Olga 
Spencer Foderingham, and Bernice “Bunny” Jordan Whims.
107	
Tina Baines Brereton also refers to the movements of the performers as art 
in Show Girls, minute 31:00. May Oliver, Interview with John ­Gilmore, John 
Gilmore Fonds, P0004-11-0049, 17 February 1982, audio CD, ­Concordia 
­University Library Special Collections; Vanessa Blais-Tremblay, “Jazz, 
­Gender, Historiography: A Case Study of the ‘Golden Age’ of Jazz in 
­Montréal (1925–1955)” (McGill University Libraries, 2018), 123.
108	
Lam, Show Girls, minute 1:15.

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
289
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
Blais-Tremblay notes that “[Josephine] Baker’s dance could be reclaimed as 
modern art because it can be aligned with what Houston Baker identified 
in Modernism and the Harlem Renaissance as the two guiding tropes of 
black modernist art and literature: the mastery of form, and the deforma-
tion of mastery,” so too might we think of Black dancers’ performances 
in Montréal as modern art.109 I do not draw these connections to be glib; 
instead, I want to open a discussion about where Black visual artists might 
have turned to express themselves and show their work at a moment in 
time where virulent racism, poverty, and segregation would have trun-
cated their opportunities to do so.
Whoever the visual artists were in Montréal during the 1920s, they ex-
isted within a rich artistic community, but, because of the sociopolitical 
challenges they faced, their mark on the scene has been obscured and con-
tinues to be by lack of documentation. The fact is that a large majority of 
the Black population in Montréal at the time were living in severe poverty 
and doing everything they could simply to survive.110 Their options were 
limited not only by this orchestrated financial circumstance but also by real 
structural and institutional stumbling blocks such as segregation and rac-
ism, doubtless preventing their access to the “mainstream” art scene. Their 
art would have likely remained within the confines of the Black community 
which in Canada has routinely been targeted by urban renewal projects 
and gentrification, often with little regard for cultural preservation.111 The 
likelihood of Black visual artists’ work being documented or even safely 
conserved long enough for it to be studied or exhibited a century later is 
extremely low. Yet these artists surely existed, and hopefully some of their 
work is tucked away somewhere unknown for now.
V.  THE ARCHIVAL CONUNDRUM
While the 1920s are regarded as a key cultural moment in Montréal when 
it comes to music and performing arts, particularly for Black people, the 
Black art history of the period remains obscure.112 Using this period as a 
109	
Blais-Tremblay, “Jazz, Gender, Historiography,” 123.
110	
Williams, Blacks in Montréal, 36; Israel, The Montréal Negro Community, 57.
111	
High, “Little Burgundy,” 27–44; Ted Rutland, Displacing Blackness: Planning, 
Power, and Race in Twentieth-Century Halifax (Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 2018); “Hogan’s Alley,” Places That Matter, <placesthatmatter.ca/ 
location/hogans-alley/>, accessed 2 August 2020.
112	
Reynolds, “Toot Sweet”; Williams, “Little Burgundy”; John Gilmore, Who's 
Who of Jazz in Montréal: Ragtime to 1970, Dossier Québec Series (Montréal: 
Véhicule Press, 1989); Oscar Peterson, A Jazz Odyssey : The Life of Oscar 
­Peterson, ed. Richard Palmer (London: Continuum, 2002); Justine Lebeau, 

290	
joana joachim
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
case study to underline the necessity of a specialized art historical approach 
reveals the glaring archival chasms relating to Black histories in Canada. 
As underlined by Thompson, “Historically, Black communities have not 
had control over their histories, the places and spaces of their communi-
ties, and the manner in which narratives of belonging and dis-belonging 
to the nation are catalogued within the archive.”113 The same holds true for 
visual art and material culture. Operating under de facto segregation at the 
time, Montréal’s “white” art institutions hold virtually no record of Black 
artistic practices from this period.114 This gap has remained intact to this 
day. Thompson’s observations about archival gaps in the Black Canadian 
context are also reflective of the major underrepresentation of Black art his-
tory in Canadian institutions.115 The process of looking into this historical 
period in the Montréal archives, including public institutions, university 
libraries, archival collections, community centres, and private collections, 
reveals an alarming lack of knowledge regarding the period’s visual artists 
despite the well recorded history of music and theatre.116 Using the tenets 
of bfah praxis is a way to contend with these hurdles and reflect on the 
larger issues at stake.
It is impossible to see black holes. They emit no light. However, it is 
possible to see the effects they have on their environment. Put another way, 
one can indirectly see black holes because of their surroundings — their 
context. This is called the event horizon. bfah can serve as a set of tools 
Brian Foss, Nathalie Bondil, Hélène Sicotte, Esther Trépanier, and Kristina 
­Huneault, 1920s Modernism in Montréal: The Beaver Hall Group, ed. Jacques 
Des Rochers and Brian Foss (Montréal, Quebec: Montréal Museum of Fine 
Arts, 2015).
113	
Cheryl Thompson, “Black Canada,” 80.
114	
Winks, The Blacks in Canada, 337–345; Williams, The Road to Now, 38–73; Lam, 
Show Girls.
115	
Michael Maranda. “Hard Numbers: A Study on Diversity in Canada’s 
Galleries” Canadian Art. April 5, 2017, <https://canadianart.ca/features/
art-leadership-diversity/>, accessed 27 June 2018; Connor Garel, “Why 
Have There Been No Great Black Canadian Women Artists?” Canadian Art, 
10 January 2019, <canadianart.ca/essays/why-have-there-been-no-great-
black-canadian-women-artists/>, accessed 10 August 2020; Joana Joachim, 
“‘Embodiment and Subjectivity’: Intersectional Black Feminist Curatorial 
Practices in Canada,” RACAR: Revue D'art Canadienne/Canadian Art ­Review 
43.2 (2018): 34–47; Yaniya Lee, “How Canada Forgot Its Black Artists,” 
The FADER, 31 August 2016, <thefader.com/2016/08/31/black-artists-in- 
canada>, accessed 13 August 2020.
116	
Portions of this article were written in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Various closures and lockdowns have limited on-site archival research. My 
hope is to pursue this further in coming years.

	
Black Gold: A Black Feminist Art History of 1920s Montréal	
291
CJH/ACH  56.3  © 2021
to decipher the “event horizon” of moments in history for which archival 
evidence is lacking. While specific Black visual artists in 1920s Montréal 
remain shrouded in mystery, the context of jazz, performance, poetry, com-
munity organizing, the white art scene, and segregation in the city at the 
time constitute enough of an “event horizon” to decipher this historical 
black hole’s shape. By applying bfah, a new art history emerges from well-
known periods, images, and objects as well as lesser-known ones. Through 
a deliberately bfah approach, new meanings arise and the voices of Black 
women, even when obstructed by mainstream white narratives, begin to 
surface and shed light upon their specific visual histories and those of their 
communities. Finally, I would like to stress that what matters in this praxis 
is to underline the subtext lurking at the edges of these histories and to 
make intangible presences visible. With this praxis, it is possible to inves-
tigate how and why entire periods of Black Canadian art history seem to 
have vanished from historical records.
joana joachim will join Concordia University’s Faculty of Fine Arts as assistant 
professor of Black studies in art education, art history, and social justice in January 
2022. Her research and teaching interests include Black feminist art histories, Black 
diasporic art histories, critical museologies, Black Canadian studies, and Canadian 
slavery studies. Her scholarship has appeared in books, journals, and magazines 
including Manuel Mathieu: World Discovered under Other Skies; Spaces and Places of 
Canadian Popular Culture; the “What is Critical Curating?” special issue of RACAR; 
Manuel Mathieu: World Discovered under Other Skies; the “Mixed Heritage: (Self) 
Portraits and Identity Negotiation” special issue of Americana: e-Journal of American 
Studies In Hungary; and C Magazine.

