VARIA
Agata Jakubowska
FEMINISM IN THE TIME OF TRANSFORMATION. 
PIOTR PIOTROWSKI, ZOFIA KULIK  
AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF FEMINIST ART 
HISTORY IN POLAND 
In 2015, a few months after the passing of Piotr Piotrowski, an exhi-
bition in his memory was organized at the Profile Foundation gallery in 
Warsaw, in which four artists – Jarosław Kozłowski, Zofia Kulik, Zbigniew 
Libera, and Krzysztof Wodiczko – took part.1 The information prepared by 
the gallery read: “The exhibition features works that were the subject of Piotr 
Piotrowski’s essays as well as a reference for his art historical research, his 
vision of art history, of artistic topography and its significance for Poland’s 
and Eastern Europe’s cultural experience.”2 
Zofia Kulik, the only woman in the group, showed a miniature of her work 
titled From Siberia to Cyberia (1998–2004). The original version of the work 
comprises a rectangle 21 metres in length and 2.4 metres in height, made 
up of eighteen thousand small photographs – TV screenshots of shows and 
films watched by the artist, or rather photographed by her. The fact that Kulik 
chose this particular work for the exhibition in tribute to Piotrowski comes as 
no surprise. The first version of the work was presented in 1999 at the artist’s 
monographic exhibition curated by Piotrowski at the National Museum in 
Poznań. The presentation was actually under the title From Siberia to Cybe-
ria, and a fragment of the work was reproduced on the cover of the exhibition 
catalogue.3 This exhibition was in a way the climax of a Piotrowski’s interest 
in Kulik’s art that had developed in this very particular period – the first dec-
1  Its title repeated that of one of his books – Sztuka według polityki. Od Melancholii do 
Pasji [Art According to Politics. From Melancholy to Passion], Cracow 2007.
2  See <http://www.fundacjaprofile.pl/wystawy.php?act=more&a=330> [accessed: 
November 28, 2021].
3  A miniature of the piece, still smaller than the one exhibited at the Profile Founda-
tion, and made specially by the artist for this occasion, was a gift for Piotrowski on his 60th 
Artium Quaestiones 33, 2022: 261–278 © The Author(s), Adam Mickiewicz University Press, 2022. 
Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the CC licence (BY-NC-ND, https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Agata Jakubowska
262
ade of post-communist Poland – and was strongly influenced by the specific-
ity of this time. 
The significance of Piotr Piotrowski’s writings in the 1990s has already 
been recognised by many authors. Magdalena Ujma, for example, wrote that 
in this decade in Poland “there was no widely recognised authority of art criti-
cism. With one exception. One waited for texts and books by Piotr Piotrowski, 
which were situated between art history and criticism and caused waves of 
reviews, polemics, and commentaries.”4 According to her, his success resulted 
from the fact that he accurately described this time. A similar opinion was ex-
pressed by Karol Sienkiewicz, who wrote that “Although Piotrowski showed 
a slippage typical for art historians towards what artists or curators did, as 
a theoretician, he was able to define the ideological framework of their ac-
tivities, describe the processes taking place, and name the sides of a broader 
dispute about Polish modernization in which artists took an active part.”5 In 
this text, I concentrate on one fragment of his activities from the first decade 
of post-communist Poland – his writings on Zofia Kulik’s art and, more pre-
cisely, on their feminist dimension. I argue that Piotrowski not only, as the 
quoted authors claimed, presented accurately her art and its relationship to 
the political situation of that time, but he also practised a form of feminist re-
flection that was new in Polish art history and criticism, intensively engaged 
in criticism of the recent communist past and current politics. He catalysed, 
through his activities in many roles, including being a teacher at the Institute 
of Art History at Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań, the development of 
this specific feminist discourse. 
Today, in Poland and more generally in Eastern Europe, an effort is being 
made to rethink the recent past of feminist scholarship, especially its devel-
opment in the period of transformation from state socialism to democracy.6 
It is commonly observed that the 1990s were the time when Polish feminist 
activists and intellectuals established close ties with Western critical thought 
associated with democracy distancing themselves from socialist ideas of the 
birthday from the staff of the Institute of Art History of the Adam Mickiewicz University 
in Poznań, with the support of the artist.
4  M. Ujma, “Krytyczki w Polsce po 1989 roku” [Female critics in Poland after 1989], 
in: Polki, Patriotki, Rebeliantki [Polish Women, Patriots, Rebels], ed. I. Kowalczyk, Poznań 
2018, p. 178.
5  K. Sienkiewicz, Zatańczą ci, co drżeli. Polska sztuka krytyczna [Those who Trem-
bled will Dance. Polish Critical Art], Kraków–Warszawa 2014, p. 435.
6  See, for example, one of the most recent publications on the subject Gender, Gener-
ations, and Communism in Central and Eastern Europe and Beyond, ed. A. Artwińska, 
A. Mrozik, London 2021.

Feminism in the Time of Transformation
263
emancipation of women. As Magdalena Grabowska put it, “state socialism 
was taken for granted as a detrimental gap in the development of a West-
ern-style liberal identity for Poland and Polish feminism”.7 At the same time, 
they mobilized criticism of the conservative, patriarchal character of the dem-
ocratic transformation taking place in Poland that manifested itself in the 
increased influence of the Catholic Church and the 1993 restriction of the 
anti-abortion law. The analysis that I propose in this text offers a close reading 
of this process in the domain of art history in Poland, using as an example one 
milieu in which a crucial role was played by, paradoxically, a male art histori-
an not particularly interested in women artists, Piotr Piotrowski.
ZOFIA KULIK
Three separate periods can be distinguished in Zofia Kulik’s artistic ca-
reer.8 The first and shortest of these was at the turn of the 1970s, when the 
artist studied sculpture under Jerzy Jarnuszkiewicz at the Warsaw Academy 
of Fine Arts. During the second, from 1971 to 1987, she shared her life and 
artistic practice with Przemysław Kwiek in a duo known as KwieKulik. The 
form of their activities stemmed from a non-traditional treatment of sculp-
ture that they acquired when still at the art school, i.e., sculpture is seen not 
as a closed form but as being under constant transformation – a process whose 
stages are documented and shown. By the end of the 1980s, the KwieKulik 
duo broke up, parting in both their personal and professional live. At the turn 
of the 1990s, Zofia Kulik began making very different artworks. Initially, these 
were simple hand-made collages, later replaced by photomontages made us-
ing multiple exposures. The common element in all the works was a human 
figure inserted in decorative patterned structures, treated as an ornament, and 
juxtaposed with details referring to the communist system in different ways. 
The nude male body in all the pieces was that of a young artist, Zbigniew 
Libera, who posed for her assuming various postures and performing various 
gestures that Kulik took from art and visual culture.
Zofia Kulik’s individual practice quickly attracted attention of both crit-
ics and curators. From 1989 onwards, her works were exhibited at numerous 
7  M. Grabowska, “Bringing the Second World In: Conservative Revolution(s), Socialist 
Legacies, and Transnational Silences in the Trajectories of Polish Feminism”, Signs: Jour-
nal of Women in Culture and Society 2012, 37(2), p. 396.
8  More in T. Załuski, “How to Live and Work with Two Artistic Biographies: Zofia 
Kulik’s Archival Drive”, in: Zofia Kulik. Methodology, My Love, ed. A. Jakubowska, Warsaw 
2019, pp. 54–77.

Agata Jakubowska
264
solo shows, both in Poland and abroad, the first being Visual Idioms of Soc-
Age, organised in 1989 at the ZPAF Small Gallery in Warsaw, followed by 
a show at the Postmasters Gallery in NYC a year later,9 and at many impor-
tant group presentations of current Polish art.10 In 1993, a photo of the artist 
posing before one of her works was put on the front cover of the first issue of 
“Magazyn Sztuki” (Art Magazine), a magazine that in the 1990s played a huge 
role in developing the critical discourse on art.11 A conversation with Zofia 
Kulik, titled Being nothing but an obedient psycho-physical instrument, was 
the opening text.12 
PIOTR PIOTROWSKI ON ZOFIA KULIK
At the turn of the 1990s, Piotrowski remained inattentive to Zofia Kulik’s 
artistic practice, at least he did not write about her. This could in part have 
been due to his longer stays abroad, in the US, where he was on fellowships.13 
He was also engaged in writing a book on the Russian avant-garde. The work 
came out in 1993 under the title The Artist Between Revolution and Reac-
tion. A Study in the Ethical History of Art.14 It seems that at the beginning of 
the decade, he did not closely follow the development of the Polish art scene. 
If he published texts on Polish art at that time, he would go back to the 1970s, 
including the actions that Kulik had undertaken together with Przemysław 
Kwiek as the KwieKulik duo. In a book published in 1991 as The Decade. On 
the Syndrome of the 1970s, Artistic Culture, Criticism, Art, he wrote about 
  9  See <http://kulikzofia.pl/en/cv-zofii-kulik/> [accessed: November 28, 2021].
10  Such as Bakunin in Dresden. Polnische Kunst Heute (1990, Kunstpalast, Düssels-
dorf; Kampagelfabrik, Hamburg; 1991 Centre for Contemporary Art Ujazdowski Castle, 
Warsaw).
11  More on this see, e.g., in the already mentioned texts: Ujma, “Krytyczki…”, p. 179; 
Sienkiewicz, Zatańczą…, p. 115.
12  „Bądź tylko posłusznym, psychofizycznym instrumentem… Wywiad z Zofią Kulik. 
Rozmawiał – Ryszard Ziarkiewicz” [Being nothing but an obedient psycho-physical instru-
ment. Ryszard Ziarkiewicz talks to Zofia Kulik], Magazyn sztuki, 1993, 1, pp. 12–21.
13  The Kościuszko Foundation Research Grant for a study visit in New York (1989), 
Ailsa Mellon Bruce Senior Fellow at The Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts 
at The National Gallery of Art Washington D.C. (1989/90), J.P. Getty Fellow at Columbia 
University in New York (1994).
14  P. Piotrowski, Artysta między rewolucją i reakcją. Studium z zakresu etycznej histo-
rii sztuki awangardy rosyjskiej [The Artist Between Revolution and Reaction. A Study in 
the Ethical History of Art], Poznań 1993.

Feminism in the Time of Transformation
265
their Activities for the Head (1978).15 His approach was critical, as he saw 
these actions as “extremely poor” and as “having virtually nothing to propose, 
[being] boring and pretentious”.16 Piotrowski repeated and developed his crit-
icism in a paper Postmodernism and Post-totalitarianism delivered in 1993 
in Bratislava, at a conference “Totalitarianisms and Traditions”, which was 
later published first in the Slovak art magazine “ARS” and in the already men-
tioned “Magazyn Sztuki”.17 
It is difficult to pinpoint the exact moment when Piotrowski became in-
terested in Kulik’s solo artistic activities. The artist herself gives 1994 as the 
year when the two actually met.18 Kulik had a solo show in Poznań, at Ga-
leria U Jezuitów, titled Symbolic Weapon III, prepared by Janusz Marciniak, 
a Poznań-based artist and critic. Piotrowski most probably saw the exhibi-
tion;19 what Zofia Kulik remembers, however, is that they met not at the gal-
lery but at the international congress Contemporary Art, Contemporary Chal-
lenges in a Period of Transformation, organised in Poznań at the same time. 
Piotrowski was responsible for the part of the conference dedicated to visual 
arts20 and Kulik was mentioned there by one of the speakers, the American 
art historian Steven Mansbach, who said that in characterising the modern 
movement we need “sensitivity to specific local conditions, despite the claims 
to universality”. He gave an example of Kulik’s works when he claimed that 
“What was as meaningful in New York, London, and Paris, given the quite 
specific historical, political, and cultural contexts of the post-War epoch, may 
have little relevance to the contemporary climate of Bucharest, Sofia, Mos-
cow, or even Poznań – as we can see with the recent work of the Polish artist, 
Zofia Kulik.”21
15  P. Piotrowski, Dekada. O syndromie lat siedemdziesiątych, kulturze artystycznej, 
krytyce i sztuce – wybiórczo i subiektywnie [The Decade. On the Syndrome of the 1970s, 
Artistic Culture, Criticism, Art], Poznań 1991.
16  Ibidem, p. 56.
17  It was published at around the same time as the Polish version. “Post-modernism 
and Post-totalitarianism. The Poland Case of the 1970s”, ARS 1993, 2–3, pp. 231–242. 
“Postmodernizm i posttotalitaryzm” (Postmodernism and Post-totalitarianism), Magazyn 
Sztuki 1994, 4, pp. 56–73.
18  E-mail from the artist, 24 April 2017.
19  Information from Piotr Piotrowski’s wife, Maria Żuk-Piotrowska.
20  Two editions of the international congress Culture of the Time of Transformation 
were organised in Poznań in the 1990s, dedicated to the culture of Central and Eastern Eu-
rope. The first one took place on 2–5 February 1994, the second on 11–14 March 1998. Both 
were organised by the Poznań Society of Friends of the Sciences. 
21  S. Mansbach, “Contemporary Art, Contemporary Challenges in a Period of Trans-
formation”, in: Culture of the Time of Transformation International Congress. Materials. 

Agata Jakubowska
266
Izabela Kowalczyk – Piotrowski’s student at that time, who wrote under 
her maiden name Pikosz – noticed the coincidence between the dates of the 
Kulik exhibition and the congress in her review of the show, “It is telling”, she 
wrote “that the exhibition was opened a day before the Contemporary Art, 
Contemporary Challenges in a Period of Transformation congress began”. Zo-
fia Kulik’s works were thus introduced into the discussion about the process 
of political and artistic changes after the fall of communism.22 Kowalczyk’s 
(Pikosz) text was polemical to the interpretation of Kulik’s works as proposed 
by the curator of the presentation, Janusz Marciniak.23 She found this inter-
pretation to be too narrow. Like many other interpreters of Kulik’s art, he too 
admired her for “being able to grapple with the experience of totalitarianism 
and find a form for expressing the weight of the external and internal desola-
tion it had caused.”24 Kowalczyk (Pikosz) believed that the works did indeed 
deal with enslavement and submission but in a broader sense, not only caused 
by the communist state but also by “other tropes in human existence”. The 
author pointed mainly to the photographs of the nude man so extensively 
used by Kulik. His poses often repeated those taken by people of power, while 
how he was presented “made him look ridiculous”. According to Kowalczyk 
(Pikosz), “the artist thus ridicules the patriarchal culture, mocks the systems 
of enslavement that it has created.”25 
Piotrowski’s first opinion on Kulik came in a text The Old Attitude and 
the New Faith, published a year after the above polemics, in 1995, in a cat-
alogue of an exhibition Beyond Belief: Contemporary Art from East-Central 
Europe organised at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago and re-
printed in an extended version in the already-mentioned “Magazyn Sztuki”.26 
His text concentrated on artistic projects that were heavily immersed in the 
Poznań, 2–5 February 1994, ed. J. Brendel, S. Jakóbczyk, Poznań 1998, p. 293. Any analysis 
of Kulik’s works was not offered by Mansbach, he just presented two reproductions of her 
works.
22  I. Pikosz, “Chwytając za każdą broń” [Grabbing at Every Weapon], Czas Kultury 
1994, 1, p. 72. 
23  Kowalczyk also wrote about Kulik in a similar spirit in her 1995 M.A. thesis at the 
Institute of Art History, on the feminist motifs in Polish art (synopsis published in Artium 
Quaestiones in 1997 as “Wątki feministyczne w polskiej sztuce” [Feminist Tropes in Polish 
Art], pp. 135–152).
24  J. Marciniak, “Sztuka jest bronią bezbronnych. O wystawie »Broń symboliczna« 
Zofii Kulik” [Art is the Weapon of the Defenceless], in: Broń symboliczna III [Symbolic 
Weapon III], ex. cat., U Jezuitów Gallery, Poznań 1994.
25  Pikosz, “Chwytając...”, p. 73.
26  P. Piotrowski, “The Old Attitude and the New Faith” in: Beyond Belief: Contempo-
rary Art from East Central Europe, ed. L.J. Hoptman, ex. cat., Museum of Contemporary 

Feminism in the Time of Transformation
267
political situation of Poland.27 Kulik interested him, as her “art combines po-
litical criticism with a feminist perspective. This combination seems very sig-
nificant from the standpoint of the broader problem of the position of women 
in Polish society.”28 
Piotrowski’s writings about Zofia Kulik seem to merge the above-men-
tioned proposals made by Marciniak and Kowalczyk (Pikosz), as he presented 
her art as combining political criticism with a feminist perspective. Whilst 
Marciniak failed to address the gender issue,29 Kowalczyk (Pikosz) focused 
on it, although from a universal perspective and not in any specific political 
reality. It was in the connection of these two aspects that Piotrowski saw the 
specificity of Kulik’s art.30 To him, she was an artist who touched both on the 
power relations between a woman and the patriarchal system and someone 
who related to the current political situation, actually to the position of wom-
en in the Polish communist and post-communist society. When describing 
this, he stressed “the negative attitude of Polish culture towards women, a cul-
ture moulded by Catholic views and institutions, regardless of whether the 
communists, liberals, peasants, or ex-communists again”. He pointed to the 
important role of the Church in Poland which, among other things, resulted 
from the fact that Polish history “has made Catholicism an integral part of 
the national tradition”, and observed that whilst the communist authorities 
masked their anti-woman politics, “after the ‘break’, at a time of heightened 
Catholic reaction, the situation changed to the extent that the authorities 
stopped trying to conceal their repressive attitudes towards women.”31 
Art, Chicago 1995, pp. 34–45; P. Piotrowski, “Beyond the Old and New Belief”, Magazyn 
Sztuki 1996, 10(2), pp. 161–176.
27  The other artists who he discussed in this context were collectives Pomarańczowa 
Alternatywa, Gruppa, Luxus, Koło Klipsa, Łódź Kaliska, and Robert Rumas, Zbigniew Libera, 
Józef Robakowski, Grzegorz Klaman.
28  Piotrowski, “The Old Attitude…”, p. 41.
29  He only wrote: “it is symptomatic that it was a woman who managed to cope with 
the experience of totalitarianism […] and oppose the stigma of the epoch of the enslaved 
mind, the stigma of its not-enslaved intelligence and salvaged sensitivity”. Marciniak, 
“Sztuka jest bronią bezbronnych”.
30  Piotrowski made a reference to Kowalczyk’s interpretation in a text published in the 
Kulik monograph exhibition in the National Museum in Poznań in 1999. P. Piotrowski, 
“Between Siberia and Cyberia. On the Art of Zofia Kulik and on Museums”, in: Zofia Kulik. 
From Siberia to Cyberia, ex. cat., National Museum, Poznań, 1999, p. 15 
31  Piotrowski, “Beyond…”, p. 173, 172. Law of 7 January 1993 on Family Planning, 
Human Embryo Protection and Conditions of Permissibility of Abortion made the latter 
more stringent, by permitting abortion only in three cases: a threat to the life or health of 

Agata Jakubowska
268
In the second half of the 1990s, Zofia Kulik began to play an ever-greater 
role in Piotrowski’s writing, being, as he put it, “one of the most interesting 
artists in the domain of visual arts who touches on the issues of the visual 
structure of the language of power.”32 By accentuating this aspect of her art, 
he consistently pointed to its feminist dimension. In a text to the catalogue 
of her solo exhibition in 1999, which, as I have already mentioned, he organ-
ised at the National Museum in Poznań, Piotrowski presented Kulik as a per-
son who emancipated herself by breaking the binding rules in culture gov-
erning gender relations.33 Piotrowski referred to her works that used photos 
of Libera, the expansive set of these photographs exhibited for the first time 
as The Archive of Gestures, writing that “the one who rules here is a woman, 
not a man.”34 Piotrowski explained that it was she who noticed the entire or-
ganisation of the world, while the man was just a supine element, unaware of 
broader meanings. 
The exhibition at the National Museum in Poznań could be perceived as 
strengthening Kulik’s position in the art world. At the time, the artist enjoyed 
both Polish and foreign critical acclaim, which manifested itself in the form 
of numerous exhibitions, texts, and an invitation to represent Poland at the 
Venice Biennale in 1997. However, the monographic exposition prepared by 
Piotrowski was the first to be held in an institution of a rank as high as the 
National Museum.35 This show was also the second to introduce a feminist 
perspective into this kind of institution in Poland, the first being Polish Wom-
en Artists in the National Museum in Warsaw in 1991, which was of a com-
pletely different character that will be discussed later in this text. In the case 
of the Poznań exhibition, the introduction of a feminist perspective turned 
out to be only partially successful, as the act of censorship that was performed 
at the beginning of the exhibition revealed the enormous resistance to chang-
es in gender relations in the art world or, more broadly, in society. The director 
of the museum did not agree to exhibit fragments of male nudes, photographs 
the pregnant woman, severe and irreversible fetal defect, the pregnancy is a result of an 
unlawful act. 
32  P. Piotrowski, “Sztuka krytyczna” [Critical art], Pokaz 1999, 3, p. 41.
33  Piotrowski invited English feminist art historian Sarah Wilson to also contribute to 
the catalogue.
34  Piotrowski, “Between…”, pp. 13–14.
35  In the years 1992–1997, he was Head of the Contemporary Art Department/Curator 
of the Contemporary Art Gallery at the National Museum in Poznań. On Piotrowski’s cu-
ratorial activities see K. Murawska-Muthesius, “The Critical Museum Debate Continues”, 
in: Horizontal Art History and Beyond, Revising Peripheral Critical Practices, eds. A. Jaku-
bowska, M. Radomska, Routledge 2022, pp. 15–25.

Feminism in the Time of Transformation
269
of sculptures from the Hermitage collection in St Petersburg, which were part 
of an installation titled A Home and A Museum, in the Museum hall, a space 
that could not be bypassed by viewers who came to see the collection and not 
the temporary exhibition. He proposed to move the work to a side room, but 
the artist did not agree. Instead, she proposed to attach fig leaves onto the 
photographs, which the director opposed, saying that it would look like cen-
sorship. Finally, the installation was taken down.36
PIOTROWSKI AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF FEMINIST ART 
HISTORY IN POLAND
It should be noted that in the earlier period, Piotrowski had not partici- 
pated in any discussions or activities related to feminism, feminist art, or 
women’s art. Most probably, this was not due to a lack of knowledge of the 
above but rather that while socialist ideas of emancipation of women were 
unacceptable for Piotrowski, who was a member of the anti-communist op-
position, Western ideas of second-wave feminism, which appeared in Poland 
in the 1970s,37 functioned in this country as apolitical in the sense that they 
were not related to activist and political actions and manifests, and as such 
were uninteresting to Piotrowski. 
In socialist Poland, two more extensive texts on feminism in art (not so 
much in art history) were published, both written by male critics. The first was 
an article by Stefan Morawski, that appeared in 1977 under the title Neo-fem-
inism in Art.38 It presented feminist art as a revolt by women against society 
but described it as a foreign phenomenon. The text ended with the author’s 
reassurance that it was written as an “invitation to reflect on the same problems 
in our own country.”39 The second elaboration on feminism in art was a text 
by Grzegorz Dziamski published in 1988.40 He finished his long overview of 
the most important characteristics of feminist art with a fragment on Polish 
women artists, as if demonstrating that the invitation formulated by Morawski 
36  More on this: Piotrowski, Sztuka według polityki, pp. 205–207.
37  See more in: A. Jakubowska, “Circulation of Feminist Ideas in Communist Poland”, 
in: Globalizing East European Art Histories: Past and Present, ed. B. Hock, A. Allas, Rout-
ledge 2018, pp. 135–148.
38  S. Morawski, “Neofeminizm w sztuce” [Neo-feminism in Art], Sztuka 1977, 4, 
pp. 57–63.
39  Ibidem, p. 63.
40  G. Dziamski, “Sztuka feministyczna” [Feminist Art], Miesięcznik Literacki 1988, 
2–3, pp. 104–116 (part I) and 1988, 4, pp. 81–90 (part II). 

Agata Jakubowska
270
was undertaken by them. Yet feminist art is presented by him as a radical ar-
tistic practice that developed in the West and influenced some Polish artists, 
and not as resulting from the critical analysis of the local society and the po-
sition of women within it. What is worth noting is that Dziamski functioned 
in the Poznań scholarly and artistic milieu, just like Piotrowski. What’s more, 
it was in Poznań, in the ON Gallery, that Izabella Gustowska and Krystyna 
Piotrowska conducted their artistic and curatorial activities concentrated on 
women artists, including the organisation of all-women exhibitions.41 The text 
by Dziamski and the activities of both artists revealed a certain ambivalence 
towards feminism, manifested by a favourable attitude towards the feminist 
concentration on women and their experiences but also by a strong objection to 
entangling art with politics. Although they recognised the significance of pro-
moting women artists, and the validity of the question about whether there was 
any community among women (a similar sensitivity being the common basis), 
they would still be reluctant to connect art with social or political issues. 
The same attitude was apparent after 1989, both in the activities of Gu-
stowska42 or Dziamski, as well as in other initiatives undertaken by female 
critics or historians, for example, the all-women exhibitions with the par-
ticipation of Zofia Kulik. What they had in common was that they did not 
problematize nor politicise the question of gender.43 The profile of these ex-
hibitions had an obvious impact on the way that Kulik’s art was presented 
there; paradoxically, the issue of gender was left unnoticed. In a short note 
in the catalogue of Polish Women Artists, Agnieszka Morawińska, curator of 
the exhibition, did not mention the issue at all.44 This is important for a com-
parison between this show, which I have already mentioned in the text as the 
first one introducing the feminist perspective into any Polish national muse-
um, and the Poznań monographic exhibition of Kulik. Polish Women Artists 
referred to earlier international shows presenting women artists that aimed 
at challenging the male-dominated art canon.45 It did not, however, offer any 
41  See more in: A. Jakubowska, “Meetings: Exhibitions of Women’s Art Curated by 
Izabella Gustowska”, Ikonotheka 2016, 26, pp. 291–311.
42  Krystyna Piotrowska emigrated to Sweden in the 1980s.
43  I. Kowalczyk, “Wystawy sztuki kobiet 1991–2001: od esencjalizmu do konstrukty-
wizmu” [All-Women Exhibitions 1991–2001: From Essentialism to Constructivism], Sztu-
ka i Dokumentacja 2016, 15, pp. 97–105.
44  A. Morawińska, “Zofia Kulik”, in: Artystki polskie [Polish Women Artists], ex. cat., 
National Museum, Warsaw 1991, p. 216.
45  See texts by the curator of Artystki polskie (Polish Women Artists) and by Maria Po-
przęcka, “Inne? Kobiety i historia sztuki” [Different? Women and Art History], in: Artystki 
polskie [Polish Women Artists], ex. cat., National Museum, Warsaw 1991, pp. 9–16, 17–20.

Feminism in the Time of Transformation
271
feminist interpretation of art created by women. A similar scenario was the 
case with the catalogue to the exposition Presence III, organised in Poznań in 
1992, in which Kulik’s art was discussed in a text by Alicja Kepińska.46 No-
ticeably, both texts (by Morawińska and Kępińska) mentioned the nude mod-
el, but neither of them discussed the gender relations present in her art. No 
different was the situation with the catalogue to the exhibition Woman About 
Woman organised in Bielsko-Biała in 1996 in the article by Adam Sobota ti-
tled The Art of Zofia Kulik. The only difference from the two texts mentioned 
above is that the phrase “nude model” was replaced by “nude man”, thus the 
author at least noticed the model’s gender.47
This short overview of comments on the oeuvre of Zofia Kulik formulated 
on the occasions of all-women exhibitions organised in Poland in the 1990s, 
demonstrates one type of the discourse on women artists that was popular 
during that period. It concentrated on promoting women and their intimate 
experiences but ignored gender power relations and the situation of women 
in society.48 Another type of discourse, one that put exactly these issues at its 
centre, had started to develop, and it was Piotr Piotrowski who played a crucial 
role in this process.49 
46  A. Kępińska, “Bliskość bytu” [The Proximity of Existence], in: Obecność III [Pres-
ence III], ex. cat., BWA, Poznań 1992, n.p.
47  A. Sobota, “Sztuka Zofii Kulik” [The Art of Zofia Kulik], in: Kobieta o kobiecie 
[Woman about Woman], ex. cat., „Galeria Bielska” BWA, Bielsko-Biała 1996, pp. 32–35.
48  It is symptomatic that the feminist campaign against restriction of the anti-abortion 
law used an artwork not by a Polish but by an American artist – Barbara Kruger, her poster 
Your Body is a Battleground – who appeared in Poland on the invitation of the curator Mi-
lada Ślizińska. 
49  In this case study, I concentrate on Piotrowski’s and his milieu’s activities that I per-
ceive to be the most influential, yet some female art historians and artists that promoted 
a feminist perspective at that time, at least sporadically, should be mentioned: Ewa Franus, 
who at that time lived in Holland; Barbara Limanowska, an art historian engaged in femi-
nist activism, the leader of a feminist organization, OŚKA, who in 1999 published a special 
issue of its bulletin devoted to the feminist perspective in women’s literary and visual pro-
duction (OŚKA. Pismo Ośrodka Informacji Środowisk Kobiecych 1999, 3(8)); Ewa Toniak, 
who criticized one of the exhibitions mentioned in the text for lack of connections with 
a feminist agenda (E. Toniak, “Ogród Zosi” [Zosia’s Garden], Obieg 1993, 7–8 (51–52), 
p. 65); or Katarzyna Kozyra, who introduced feminist materials to a zin/magazine published 
by students from Warsaw Academy of Fine Arts (Czereja 1995, 5). The above-mentioned 
Milada Ślizińska, who invited feminist artists to exhibit in Warsaw, diminished the femi-
nist agenda of their work as, when exposed, it resulted in diminished interest by the media 
and public, see “Gender artysty mnie nie dotyczy. Wywiad z Miladą Ślizińską” [I’m not 
concerned by the gender of an artist. An interview with Milada Ślizińska], OŚKA. Pismo 
Ośrodka Informacji Środowisk Kobiecych 1999, 3(8), pp. 19–23.

Agata Jakubowska
272
As already mentioned, Piotr Piotrowski did not participate in these 
pro-women apolitical activities. He was not interested in women’s art as 
such. What interested him was critical art, also that created by women. Fem-
inism appeared in the scope of his interests as a result of the influence of 
the very engaged, both in feminism and politically, American art history and 
criticism. This is very apparent, for example, in his book In the Shadow of 
Duchamp. The New York Notes, which was published after his return from 
research stays in the States.50 The fact that Piotrowski became involved in 
feminist art history and criticism did not stem from his interest in art made 
by women but rather from his identification with the critical stance presented 
by feminism and some women artists. Nor was it based on in-depth studies 
of the feminist reflection on art. While his female student – Izabela Kowal-
czyk (Pikosz) – referred to Griselda Pollock in her above-mentioned text from 
1994, Piotrowski in his article from 1996, in which he presented a feminist 
interpretation of Zofia Kulik’s work for the first time, did not mention a single 
feminist art historian, but instead resorted to John Berger and his comments 
from the Ways of Seeing. He wrote: “in examining visual culture from a sexual 
standpoint, we can follow John Berger in saying that a characteristic feature of 
Western (masculinist) art is the principle that “men act and women appear”. 
[…] Zofia Kulik has turned the principle described by Berger upside down: 
women act, and men appear.”51 
The references to John Berger’s book, originally published in 1972, in in-
terpretations that were feminist by assumption and written in the last years 
of the 20th century, can be somewhat surprising. Interestingly, it was largely 
owing to Piotrowski that this particular fragment from Berger’s book became 
one of the most frequently cited points of reference used in feminist interpre-
tations in Poland.52 It was, first of all, because Piotrowski, an already highly 
valued and often quoted art historian in the country, cited Berger.53 Secondly, 
he was instrumental in the publication of the Ways of Seeing in Polish, which 
came out in 1997, translated by Mariusz Bryl, a colleague of Piotrowski from 
the Institute of Art History of Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań, and 
published by REBIS, which was also Piotrowski’s publisher. 
50  P. Piotrowski, W cieniu Duchampa. Notatki nowojorskie [In the Shadow of 
Duchamp: New York Notes], Poznań 1996.
51  Piotrowski, “Beyond…”, p. 173.
52  Other tropes from Berger’s book did not find much popularity. 
53  Also in his analyses of the works by Natalia LL, Piotrowski, “Postmodernizm i post-
totalitaryzm…”, p. 65.

Feminism in the Time of Transformation
273
Although Piotrowski did not resort to reading feminist research too often 
and actually did not devote much attention to women artists, he contributed 
to the development of feminist art history in Poland in several different ways. 
Some of them, when he acted as an influential critic, or as a curator, have 
already been pointed out. Yet it is also worth mentioning his role as a teacher 
who supported the feminist interests of his students. I have already discussed 
Izabela Kowalczyk’s writing on Zofia Kulik. She included her observations in 
a master thesis written in 1995 and devoted to “feminist tropes” or “feminist 
interventions”, as she called them, in the works of Polish women artists.54 
Another feminist master’s thesis written at that time under Piotrowski’s 
supervision was my work on Natalia LL.55 Supported by our teacher, we or-
ganised the Poznań Feminist Seminar in 1995, which consisted of artists’ 
presentations and an academic conference. In a short text that accompanied 
the event, we underlined that we were specifically interested in feminist is-
sues, both in art and art history, not just in women’s art. As another student 
of Piotrowski at that time, Paweł Leszkowicz, noted, we were all inspired by 
Michel Foucault. Leszkowicz observed that “Foucault’s books on power, sex-
uality, and exclusion had a significant impact on Polish new art history and 
art at the time of the political transformation in the 1990s, unsurprisingly, as 
the Polish systemic transition involved so many conflicts over discriminatory 
sexual and gender politics.”56 The conviction that reflections on women’s art 
need to confront these conflicts, not avoid them, was one of the characteristics 
of feminist art history that flourished in this milieu.
Moreover, Piotrowski’s role as an editor of the annual “Artium Quaes-
tiones” (since 199657) and an initiator of other publications should be men-
tioned here. Already in 1993, Ewa Franus, a graduate of the Institute of Art 
54  Fragments published in Artium Quaestiones in 1997 as I. Kowalczyk, “Wątki femi-
nistyczne w polskiej sztuce” [Feminist Tropes in Polish Art], pp. 135–152.
55  Fragments published in Artium Quaestiones in 1997 as A. Jakubowska, “Kobieta 
wobec seksualności – podporządkowana, uwikłana czy wyzwolona” [Woman and sexuali-
ty – submissive, entangled, or liberated?], pp. 113–134.
56  P. Leszkowicz, “Gender and Art History in Poland: A Constant Story of Subversion”, 
in: Making art history in Europe after 1945, ed. N. de Haro Garciá, P. Mayayo, J. Carrillo, 
Routledge 2020, p. 234. A more general formulation about the significance of Foucault’s 
thought in Poland at that time was formulated by Ewa Domańska in E. Domańska, “Co 
zrobił z nami Foucault?” [What Has Foucault Done to Us?], in: French Theory w Polsce 
[French Theory in Poland], ed. E. Domańska, M. Loba, Poznań 2010, pp. 61–79.
57  Piotrowski became a deputy director of the Institute of Art. History in 1996, which 
automatically, in accordance with an unwritten rule, made him a member of the editorial 
team. 

Agata Jakubowska
274
History at Adam Mickiewicz University, published an article, The Seeing, 
the Seen, which was the first presentation of the main tendencies of fem-
inist art history published in a Polish academic journal.58 The first issue 
of the magazine that appeared after Piotrowski joined its editorial team 
included articles based on the above-mentioned master’s theses by his stu-
dents (already doctoral students at that time), and a text by Griselda Pollock, 
a translation of an introduction to her book that appeared that year – Gen-
erations and Geographies in the Visual Arts: Feminist Readings.59 The next 
issue included a translation of a text written by Sarah Wilson and published 
in the catalogue of the exhibition Femininmasculin, organised in the Cen-
tre Georges Pompidou in Paris in 1995. Moreover, Piotrowski contributed 
to the publication of the Polish translation of Lynda Nead’s book The Fe-
male Nude. Art, Obscenity, and Sexuality, for many years one of the main 
points of reference for Polish art writers proposing a feminist reading of the 
female nude.60
CONCLUSION
From today’s perspective, we notice the distinctive character of feminist 
reflections on women’s art developed by Piotrowski and his milieu in the 
1990s, and in this conclusion, I will point out its two interrelated aspects. 
First, his feminist reflections were indebted to Western notions, although 
he was soon to become the author of the concept of horizontal art history, 
which undermined the significance of the narrations produced in the cen-
tres.61 At that time, horizontalization of art historical discourse meant, for 
him, that the art of particular artists should be considered in relation to lo-
cal problems and not universal art language, in the case of Zofia Kulik, in re-
lation to the patriarchal character of the political transformation in Poland. 
It did not mean turning to the local emancipatory tradition, including so-
cialist concepts and practices. Like other feminists at that time, he rejected 
58  E. Franus, “Widziane, widzące” [The Seeing, The Seen], Artium Quaestiones 1993, 
6, pp. 101–114.
59  G. Pollock, “Polityka teorii: pokolenia i geografie. Teoria feministyczna i historie 
historii sztuki” [The politics of theory: generations and geographies. Feminist theory and 
histories of art history], trans. M. Bryl, Artium Quaestiones 1997, 7, pp. 153–186.
60  L. Nead, Akty kobiety. Sztuka, obscena i seksualność, trans. E. Franus, Poznań 1998.
61  P. Piotrowski, “Toward a Horizontal History of the European Avant-Garde”, in: Eu-
ropa! Europa? The Avant-Garde, Modernism and the Fate of a Continent, eds. S. Bru et al., 
Berlin 2009, pp. 49–58.

Feminism in the Time of Transformation
275
them because they were perceived as an element of the communist regime’s 
policy. 
Secondly, for him, feminism was inseparable from the defence of democ-
racy and criticism of any form of totalitarianism. It was part of a struggle for 
freedom and against any forms of subservience of an individual to political or 
religious systems. For him, there was no raison d’²tre for feminism without 
any form of critical engagement. This is visible in his attitude to Zofia Ku-
lik’s art. As I wrote at the beginning of this text, her monographic exhibition, 
organised by Piotrowski at the National Museum in Poznań in 1999 was, 
in a way, the culmination of his interest in her art. Later, he did not devote 
much attention to it.62 This could have been caused by the fact that Kulik’s 
art changed, which can be seen, for example, in her series Patterns, exhibited 
for the first time in 2007. On the one hand, Patterns, being ornamental struc-
tures, filled with a combination of human, floral, and other motifs, inscribe 
themselves well into Kulik’s oeuvre, while on the other, they are significantly 
different. They mark some kind of release from the “necessity” to visualize 
the post-communist condition and offer the possibility of elaborating other 
aspects of her life and work.63 When asked why the earlier, political content is 
missing here, Kulik answered “I did critical work, but at the moment I don’t 
do it. In a way, I betray myself.”64 This is how Piotrowski could have seen it, 
as he was the one who never betrayed himself in this regard. 
In subsequent decades, Piotrowski’s writings gradually stopped resonat-
ing with the development of feminist scholarship and art, and they stopped 
playing that important role of the catalyst. I can only imagine that he would 
get back together with the feminist art and activism developing intensively in 
Poland in recent years.
62  He wrote about the act of censorship that took place during this exposition. For Pi-
otrowski, who criticised the strength of anti-democratic, conservatist forces in post-com-
munist Poland, the censoring of Kulik’s work was of utmost importance and he wrote about 
it in several texts, also in his book Art and Democracy in post-Communist Europe, trans. 
A. Brzyski, London 2012, pp. 278–281.
63  A. Jakubowska, “Patterns: ‘In a way, I betray myself’”, in: Zofia Kulik. Methodolo-
gy…, p. 321.
64  “W pewnym sensie zdradzam samą siebie: Z Zofią Kulik rozmawia Kamila Wie-
lebska” [In a way, I betray myself. Kamila Wielebska talks to Zofia Kuik], unpublished, sent 
to me by the artist.

Agata Jakubowska
276
BIBLIOGRAPHY
„Bądź tylko posłusznym, psychofizycznym instrumentem… Wywiad z Zofią Kulik. 
Rozmawiał – Ryszard Ziarkiewicz” [Being nothing but an obedient psycho-physi-
cal instrument. Ryszard Ziarkiewicz talks to Zofia Kulik], Magazyn Sztuki 1993, 
1, pp. 12–21
Domańska E., “Co zrobił z nami Foucault?” [What Has Foucault Done to Us?], in: 
French Theory w Polsce [French Theory in Poland], ed. E. Domańska, M. Loba, 
Poznań 2010, pp. 61–79
Dziamski G., “Sztuka feministyczna” [Feminist Art], Miesięcznik Literacki 1988, 
2–3, pp. 104–116 (part I) and 1988, 4, pp. 81–90 (part II)
Franus E., “Widziane, widzące” [The Seeing, The Seen], Artium Quaestiones 1993, 6, 
pp. 101–114
“Gender artysty mnie nie dotyczy. Wywiad z Miladą Ślizińską” [I’m not concerned by 
the gender of an artist. An interview with Milada Ślizińska], OŚKA. Pismo ośrod-
ka informacji środowisk kobiecych 1999, 3(8), pp. 19–23
Gender, Generations, and Communism in Central and Eastern Europe and Beyond, 
ed. A. Artwińska, A. Mrozik, London 2021
Grabowska M., “Bringing the Second World In: Conservative Revolution(s), Social-
ist Legacies, and Transnational Silences in the Trajectories of Polish Feminism”, 
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 2012, 37(2), pp. 385–411
Jakubowska A., “Circulation of Feminist Ideas in Communist Poland”, in: Globalizing 
East European Art Histories: Past and Present, ed. B. Hock, A. Allas, Routledge 
2018, pp. 135–148
Jakubowska A., “Kobieta wobec seksualności  – podporządkowana, uwikłana czy 
wyzwolona” [Woman and sexuality  – submissive, entangled, or liberated?], Ar-
tium Quaestiones 1997, 8, pp. 113–134
Jakubowska A., “Meetings: Exhibitions of Women’s Art Curated by Izabella Gustows-
ka”, Ikonotheka 2016, 26, pp. 291–311
Jakubowska A., “Patterns: ‘In a way, I betray myself’”, in: Zofia Kulik. Methodology, My 
Love, ed. A. Jakubowska, Warsaw 2019, pp. 307–319
Kępińska A., “Bliskość bytu” [The Proximity of Existence], in: Obecność III [Presence 
III], ex. cat., BWA, Poznań 1992, n.p.
Kowalczyk I., “Wątki feministyczne w polskiej sztuce” [Feminist Tropes in Polish 
Art], Artium Quaestiones 1997, 8, pp. 135–152
Kowalczyk I., “Wystawy sztuki kobiet 1991–2001: od esencjalizmu do konstrukty-
wizmu” [All-Women Exhibitions 1991–2001: From Essentialism to Constructi-
vism], Sztuka i Dokumentacja 2016, 15, pp. 97–105
Leszkowicz P., “Gender and Art History in Poland: A Constant Story of Subversion”, 
in: Making art history in Europe after 1945, ed. N. de Haro Garciá, P. Mayayo, 
J. Carrillo, Routledge 2020
Limanowska B., ed., Women artists, special issue, OŚKA. Pismo Ośrodka Informacji 
Środowisk Kobiecych, 1999, 3(8)
Mansbach S., „Contemporary Art, Contemporary Challenges in a Period of Trans-
formation”, in: Culture of the Time of Transformation International Congress. 

Feminism in the Time of Transformation
277
Materials. Poznań, 2–5 February 1994, ed. J. Brendel, S. Jakóbczyk, Poznań 1998, 
pp. 292–296
Marciniak J., “Sztuka jest bronią bezbronnych. O wystawie »Broń symboliczna« Zofii 
Kulik” [Art is the Weapon of the Defenceless], in: Broń symboliczna III [Symbolic 
Weapon III], exhibition catalogue, U Jezuitów Gallery, Poznań 1994, n.p.
Morawińska A., “Artystki polskie” [Polish Women Artists], in: Artystki polskie [Polish 
Women Artists], ex. cat., National Museum, Warsaw 1991, pp. 9–16
Morawski S., “Neofeminizm w sztuce” [Neo-feminism in Art], Sztuka 1977, 4, pp. 57–
63
Murawska-Muthesius K., “The Critical Museum Debate Continues”, in: Horizontal 
Art History and Beyond, Revising Peripheral Critical Practices, eds. A. Jakubow-
ska, M. Radomska, Routledge 2022, pp. 15–25
Nead L., Akty kobiety. Sztuka, obscena i seksualność, trans. E. Franus, Poznań 1998
Pikosz I., “Chwytając za każdą broń” [Grabbing At Every Weapon], Czas Kultury 1994, 
1, pp. 72–73 
Piotrowski P., Art and Democracy in post-Communist Europe, trans. A. Brzyski, Lon-
don 2012
Piotrowski P., Artysta między rewolucją i reakcją. Studium z zakresu etycznej histo-
rii sztuki awangardy rosyjskiej [The Artist Between Revolution and Reaction. 
A Study in the Ethical History of Art], Poznań 1993
Piotrowski P., “Between Siberia and Cyberia. On the Art of Zofia Kulik and on Mu-
seums”, in: Zofia Kulik. From Siberia to Cyberia, ex. cat., National Museum, 
Poznań, 1999, pp. 7–33
Piotrowski P., “Beyond the Old and New Belief”, Magazyn Sztuki 1996, 10(2), 
pp. 161–176
Piotrowski P., Dekada. O syndromie lat siedemdziesiątych, kulturze artystycznej, kry-
tyce i sztuce – wybiórczo i subiektywnie [The Decade. On the Syndrome of the 
1970s, Artistic Culture, Criticism, Art], Poznań 1991
Piotrowski P., “Post-modernism and Post-totalitarianism. The Poland Case of the 
1970s”, ARS 1993, 2–3, pp. 231–242 
Piotrowski P., “Sztuka krytyczna” [Critical art], Pokaz 1999, 3, p. 41
Piotrowski P., Sztuka według polityki. Od Melancholii do Pasji [Art According to Poli-
tics. From Melancholy to Passion], Cracow 2007
Piotrowski P., “The Old Attitude and the New Faith” in: Beyond Belief: Contemporary 
Art from East Central Europe, ed. L.J. Hoptman, ex. cat., Museum of Contempo-
rary Art, Chicago 1995, pp. 34–45
Piotrowski P., “Toward a Horizontal History of the European Avant-Garde”, in: Euro-
pa! Europa? The Avant-Garde, Modernism and the Fate of a Continent, eds. S. Bru 
et al., Berlin 2009, pp. 49–58
Piotrowski P., W cieniu Duchampa. Notatki nowojorskie [In the Shadow of Duchamp: 
New York Notes], Poznań 1996
Pollock G., “Polityka teorii: pokolenia i geografie. Teoria feministyczna i historie his-
torii sztuki” [The politics of theory: generations and geographies. Feminist the-
ory and histories of art history], trans. M.  Bryl, Artium Quaestiones 1997, 7, 
pp. 153–186

Agata Jakubowska
278
Poprzęcka M., “Inne? Kobiety i historia sztuki” [Different? Women and Art History], 
in: Artystki polskie [Polish Women Artists], ex. cat., National Museum, Warsaw 
1991, pp. 17–20
Sienkiewicz K., Zatańczą ci, co drżeli. Polska sztuka krytyczna [Those who Trembled 
will Dance. Polish Critical Art], Kraków–Warszawa 2014
Sobota A., „Sztuka Zofii Kulik” [The Art of Zofia Kulik], in: Kobieta o kobiecie [Wo-
man about Woman], ex. cat., „Galeria Bielska” BWA, Bielsko-Biała 1996, pp. 32–
35
Toniak E., “Ogród Zosi” [Zosia’s Garden], Obieg 1993, 7–8 (51–52), p. 65
Ujma M., “Krytyczki w Polsce po 1989 roku” [Female critics in Poland after 1989], in: 
Polki, Patriotki, Rebeliantki [Polish Women, Patriots, Rebels], ed. I. Kowalczyk, 
Poznań 2018, pp. 176–191
Załuski T., “How to Live and Work with Two Artistic Biographies: Zofia Kulik’s Ar-
chival Drive”, in: Zofia Kulik. Methodology, My Love, ed. A. Jakubowska, Warsaw 
2019, pp. 54–77
Agata Jakubowska
Uniwersytet Warszawski
FEMINISM IN THE TIME OF TRANSFORMATION. PIOTR PIOTROWSKI, ZOFIA 
KULIK AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF FEMINIST ART HISTORY IN POLAND
Summary
This article is an analysis of one area of Piotr Piotrowski’s (1952–2015) activity in the 
1990s – his writings on the art of Zofia Kulik and, more specifically, on its feminist 
dimension. I argue that although Piotrowski was never interested in women’s art in 
particular, not only did he practise feminist criticism during this period, but he was 
also a catalyst for the development of a specific form of feminist reflection that was 
then new in Polish art history. It focused on power relations and did not accept dis-
tancing oneself from social and political problems. I analyse it from the perspective of 
contemporary revisions of the development of feminist discourse after 1989 in Eastern 
Europe, which critically examines its embeddedness in Western ideas. 
Keywords: 
Piotr Piotrowski, Zofia Kulik, feminism, post-communism, feminist art history, 
women’s art
