American Art | Summer 2017   27    
Vol. 31, No. 2 © 2017 Smithsonian Institution
Making Black Feminist Art Histories
Over the last decade, I have had the pleasure of teaching Renée Ater’s 2003 article 
“Making History” on Meta Warrick Fuller’s Ethiopia in classes focused on twentieth-
century sculpture, histories of modernism, and African American cultural politics.1 
Such range underlines the expansive address of the artist’s work as well as the scholar’s 
vital framing of it: in homing in on Ethiopia, the signature sculpture of a long-neglected 
black female artist, Ater’s text subtly challenges art-historical discourse while holding 
out a productive model of it, one that confronts rather than suppresses the importance 
of race and gender in the making of modern American culture.
Fuller’s Ethiopia is a painted plaster depicting a standing woman in Egyptian-
inspired attire—complete with mummy wrappings—who appears to be emerging 
from a deep sleep. The significance of this iconography has not been lost on other 
scholars of African American art who have recognized the work, even if glancingly,  
as a signal achievement of the Harlem Renaissance that offers an innovative instantia-
tion of black international consciousness (29n3).2 Ater’s article builds on, deepens, 
and corrects these earlier readings by nuancing our understanding of Fuller’s particu-
lar brand of cultural nationalism, providing a robust sense of the historical context 
that informed it, and detailing, arguably for the first time, how the sculpture was 
activated in a number of pageants and performances as a model and surrogate for  
the black female body (25–28).
As such, “Making History” deftly combines close attention to the formal 
dynamics of the sculpture with meticulous archival research (13, 18). Just as 
important, Fuller’s work, as narrated by Ater—in her essay, subsequent book, 
and the dissertation from which both texts emerged—opens onto much-needed 
conversations about black feminist aesthetics and the centrality of African 
diasporic female bodies to avant-garde innovation. For, as I have argued else-
where—licensed, in part, by Ater’s research—Western modernism has time and 
again taken up black female bodies as avatars of radical difference, enabling artists 
on all sides of the color line to push against the limits of representation, whether 
Édouard Manet in Olympia (1863, Musée d’Orsay) or Cindy Sherman in her 
Bus Riders series (1976).3 Fuller’s practice can be understood both to sit within and 
to contest this tradition, especially if we follow Ater’s lead across her writing as she 
unravels the sculpture’s relationship to other sights and scenarios.
To wit: whereas in Ethiopia the remarkable bound-ness of the work seems 
intended to protect the figure from the violence of an objectifying gaze, in an earlier 
piece, Fuller confronted and thematized the actual violence to which black women 
have historically been subjected. The sculpture in question is Mary Turner: A Silent 
Protest against Mob Violence (fig. 1), and any attempt to come to grips with it must 
turn to Ater’s earlier scholarship. As she explains in her 2000 dissertation, the sub-
title of the sculpture refers to the New York “Negro Silent Protest Parade,” organized 
by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in 
July 1917 in recognition of the spate of murders that had taken tens of black lives 
in Waco, Memphis, and St. Louis in the previous year. Collapsing time and space, 
Fuller took the parade as a guide for her homage to the work’s eponymous martyr, 
a tenant farmer who dared to speak out after her husband was lynched by a mob 
in Georgia on May 19, 1918. In retribution, Turner, then eight months pregnant, 
was hung from a tree, burned, and disemboweled before her body was riddled with 
bullets. In her sculptural response—likely the earliest American artwork to depict a 
Huey Copeland
Vol. 31, No. 2 © 2017 Smithsonian Institution

28   American Art | Summer 2017
lynched black woman—Fuller 
at once refuses and registers 
this horrendous violence, 
rendering a female figure who 
holds her absent child in her 
arms, her dress giving way to 
the tortured hands and faces 
that rise like flames around the 
sculpture’s base.4
Fuller never exhibited the 
sculpture but kept it above her 
desk. The small plaster sketch 
served, then, as a memento 
and a memorial but was also, I 
think, imagined as a monument: 
the work’s patina of bronze 
paint suggests as much and its 
downturned face would have 
offered a fitting shelter and 
destination for those marchers 
in the NAACP parade. In her 
2011 book, Remaking Race and 
History, Ater argues that the 
artist “transformed” this work 
“into a positive pan-Africanist 
statement” with Ethiopia.5 Taken 
together, the pair of sculptures—
one miniature, private, and 
engulfed in flames; the other 
life-size, public, and swathed in 
bandages—outline a black femi-
nist method that aims to both 
engage and disrupt the violence 
enacted against black women in 
life and in representation.
Like Fuller’s work on the 
black female figure, Ater’s 
approach has unfolded in time, 
leading to the ambitious agenda 
for black and women’s art 
histories spelled out in Remaking Race.6 Throughout her scholarship, she emphasizes 
the performative interventions that activated and inspired Fuller’s art: the pageants 
and protests come alive on the page, allowing us to consider them as aesthetic inter-
ventions in their own right. “Making History” can thus be seen as one moment in 
an art-historical trajectory that asks us not only to take black women’s art seriously 
but also to pay heed to what Hannah Feldman calls “image tactics,” those means 
employed by marginalized subjects to make themselves visible within the public 
sphere.7 What Ater’s work suggests is that in time and with effort, “American art” 
itself can be transformed if the fullness of black women’s lives and cultural practices 
are placed at the fore.
1	
Meta Vaux Warrick Fuller, Mary 
Turner: A Silent Protest against 
Mob Violence, 1919. Painted 
plaster, 15 × 5 1/4 × 4 1/2 in. 
Museum of African American 
History, Boston and Nantucket, 
Mass. Courtesy of John L. Fuller 
Sr. Image courtesy the Museum 
of African American History, 
Boston and Nantucket, Mass.

American Art | Summer 2017   29    
Vol. 31, No. 2 © 2017 Smithsonian Institution
John Wollaston and Passion in  
Eighteenth-Century Charleston
In the spring of 2016 I taught the seminar Art of the American South at the 
University of Arkansas in Fayetteville, where I was then an associate professor of art 
history. In preparing my syllabus, one of the challenges was to assign scholarship—
especially studies dealing with early portraiture—that upheld a tone of probing 
inquiry and that sought an interpretive richness befitting the images under discus-
sion. Jennifer Van Horn’s article “The Mask of Civility: Portraits of Colonial Women 
and the Transatlantic Masquerade,” published in American Art in 2009, was very 
helpful in this regard. It lays the groundwork for new approaches to art produced in 
the decades leading up to the American Revolution and, not surprisingly, was a hit 
with my seminar students.1
I have long benefited from scholarship on nineteenth- and twentieth-century 
American art published in the journal (my present project on Edward Hopper’s 
hotel imagery builds on Erika Doss’s recent article on the artist’s visualization of 
modernist psychological suppression).2 Eighteenth-century scholarship, however, 
has not appeared as frequently in American Art, although the situation has begun 
Leo G. Mazow
Notes
My article, which appears just as Renée Ater retires from her position at the University of Maryland,  
College Park, to embark on new ventures, is meant not only to honor her 2003 American Art essay, but 
also her distinguished art-historical career and the lasting interventions of her work.
1	
Renée Ater, “Making History: Meta Warrick Fuller’s Ethiopia,” American Art 17, no. 3 (Fall 2003): 
12–31 (subsequent citations appear in the text in parentheses).
2	
Ater cites the following precedents to her study: David Driskell, “The Flowering of the Harlem 
Renaissance: The Art of Aaron Douglas, Meta Warrick Fuller, Palmer Hayden, and William H. 
Johnson,” in Harlem Renaissance: Art of Black America (New York: Studio Museum in Harlem and 
Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1987), 108; Judith Wilson, “Hagar’s Daughters: Social History, Cultural 
Heritage, and Afro-U.S. Women’s Art,” in Bearing Witness: Contemporary Works by African American 
Women Artists (New York: Spelman College and Rizzoli International Publications, Inc., 1996), 106; 
and Richard J. Powell, “Re/Birth of Nation,” in Rhapsodies in Black: Art of the Harlem Renaissance 
(London: Hayward Gallery and Institute of International Visual Arts, 1997), 18. 
3	
Huey Copeland, “In the Wake of the Negress,” in Modern Women: Women Artists at the Museum of 
Modern Art, ed. Cornelia Butler and Alexandra Schwartz (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2010), 
480–97. For a related argument, see Griselda Pollock, Differencing the Canon: Feminist Desire and the 
Writing of Art’s Histories (London: Routledge, 1999).
4	
Ater devotes a chapter to the work in her “Race, Gender, and Nation: Rethinking the Sculpture 
of Meta Warrick Fuller” (Ph.D. diss., Univ. of Maryland, 2000), 125–55. For a recent engage-
ment that extends Ater’s research and resonates with my own here, see Caitlin Beach, “Meta Warrick 
Fuller’s Mary Turner and the Memory of Mob Violence,” Nka Journal of Contemporary African Art 36 
(May 2015): 16–27.
5	
Renée Ater, Remaking Race and History: The Sculpture of Meta Warrick Fuller (Berkeley: Univ. of 
California Press, 2011), 33.
6	
Ibid., 1–7.
7	
I borrow the notion of image tactics from Hannah Feldman, “‘The Eye of History’: Photojournalism, 
Protest, and the Manifestation of 17 October 1961,” in From a Nation Torn: Decolonizing Art and 
Representation in France, 1945–1962 (Durham, N.C.: Duke Univ. Press, 2014), 159–99.
