M i c h a e l
D a n g o
Rape of the Earth: Ana Mendieta’s Defense of a Metaphor
F
eminists usually disapprove of rape metaphors—using the language or
imagery of rape to describe something that is not rape. Most often, rape
metaphors are deployed by those who have not experienced or are less
likely to experience sexual violence, and the effect is to trivialize the experi-
ences of survivors: this would include the example of the fraternity brother
who complains, “that test raped me.” Less often, a rape metaphor might
be used to highlight, rather than trivialize, violence, as when the ﬁrst Prime
Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru, described India as a woman and British
colonialism as possessing her: “but it was a possession of violence. They did
not know her, or try to know her. They never looked into her eyes” (quoted
in Fraser 2018, 730). Here, the effect is still to hide, rather than make visible,
what rape is. Rachel Fraser, who discusses this speciﬁc example and others in
an important recent article on “The Ethics of Metaphor” (2018), argues that
the problem with such a metaphor, even if it does not trivialize rape, is that
it nonetheless “restructures” the concept of rape, out of step with the “in-
terests of a hermeneutically marginalized class—that is, victims of sexual vio-
lence” (738). Projecting “rape” into non-rape domains retroactively changes
what rape means, whereas stabilizing the meaning of rape is important for
those who have survived it and those who seek to end it.
Politically in sync with Fraser, I nonetheless come to the defense of one
rape metaphor in this essay: the “rape of the earth” to describe the destruc-
tion, manipulation, and degradation of natural environments, resources, and
habitats. Or rather, I argue that the famous earthworks of Ana Mendieta
come to such a defense. In her Siluetas series from 1973 to 1980, Mendieta
dug, burned, or buried the silhouette of her body into mud, grass, and air at a
number of sites, beginning in Oaxaca, Mexico, and spreading to other loca-
tions she visited or in which she lived, especially around Iowa City, where she
went to college and graduate school. Mendieta is often accused of visually
performing a slip that Nehru performs rhetorically, conﬂating some essential
femininity (“the female body”) with something else: the Indian state, for
Nehru; nature or Mother Earth, for Mendieta. Rather than read the earth-
works as conﬂating two essentialist subjects—woman and nature—I read
them as aligning two structures of violence: sexual and environmental. To
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, volume 48, number 1, Autumn 2022.
© 2022 The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. Published by The University of Chicago Press.
https://doi.org/10.1086/720432

see these as aligned is indeed, as Fraser warns against, to restructure
the concept of rape but only to better understand it: to see a larger context
and set of conditions that come to bear upon the scene of sexual violence.
In the following section, I show how Mendieta’s Siluetas earthworks ﬁrst
emerged as extensions of performances explicitly engaged with rape in the
early 1970s. Disturbed by violence against women at the University of Iowa,
where she was a student, Mendieta restaged rape scenes or, rather, installed
scenes that documented the effects of rape: for instance, her naked body
strewn across a table in her apartment, blood on the walls, overturned furni-
ture. These scenes had what semioticians, after Charles Sanders Peirce, would
call an “indexical” relation to rape: they are the imprint evidencing that rape
happened rather than, say, a representation of rape in a movie scene. The
Siluetas, too, are indices, and what they index is not only Mendieta’s body
but a structure of violence that has produced the body in a particular way, just
as, in one of Peirce’s ﬁrst examples of an index, a murder produces a corpse
([1867] 1992, 5). While often thought of as two different stages in her career,
the earthworks and the rape works temporally and conceptually overlap in
Mendieta’s oeuvre, and her ﬁrst Siluetas directly borrow iconography and ma-
terials from concurrent blood-based performances. I argue that Mendieta
turned from the scene of her apartment to the scene of “nature” to deepen
her understanding of rape and to develop an indexical practice that could trace
the intersections, rather than separability, of multiple structures of violence.
To argue this not only shifts critiques of Mendieta as an essentialist; it
also revises the important discourse on indexicality in visual art, beginning
with Rosalind Krauss in her early essays on “Seventies Art” (1977a, 1977b),
which do not include Mendieta, although she is arguably one of the most
important artists of that decade, and expanded more recently in the work
of visual culture scholars such as Mieke Bal (1990), Tina Campt (2012),
and Mary Anne Doane (2007)—which is to say that indexicality has a fem-
inist genealogy in art criticism and theory, one that I seek to extend. Fur-
thermore, it reassess the sometimes fraught coalition between feminist and
environmentalist movements.
Ecofeminists are, like Mendieta, frequently accused of essentialism if they
claim that women have an intrinsic connection to nature that fosters an ethic
of stewardship. Among others, Greta Gaard (2011) has—I believe persua-
sively—rebutted this accusation by instead showing how foundational works
like Carolyn Merchant’s The Death of Nature, because they were invested in
unveiling the modern discursive formation that feminized nature in order to
authorize its exploitation, were nearly poststructuralist in their arguments
(see also Estévez-Saá and Lorenzo-Modia 2018). For Merchant (1990),
the point is not that women and nature are essentially linked but that the rise
152
y
Dango

of mathematical and scientiﬁc formalism beginning in the seventeenth cen-
tury understood the “constraint” of nature through sexual metaphors: “the
penetration of hidden secrets—language still used today in praising scien-
tist’s ‘hard facts,’ ‘penetrating mind,’ or the ‘thrust of his argument’” (171).
Because of metaphor’s authorization of violence, Merchant, while apprecia-
tive of the ways in which environmentalism throughout the world was led
principally by women in the late twentieth century, cautions against too easy
of a metaphoric transfer between women and the object of their activism.
She does not wish to “reinstate nature as the mother of humankind nor to
advocate that women reassume the role of nurturer dictated by that histor-
ical identity” (xxiv).
Whereas, for Merchant, environmental violence is the target rather than
source of the metaphor (so that sexual violence is mapped onto and legiti-
mizes environmental violence), in many strands of critical theory, both
Marxist and ecofeminist, “the domination of nature serve[s] as the ideolog-
ical template for political domination generally” (Mathews 2017, 55). That
is, the human-versus-nature binary encodes a further series of binaries that
counterpose social classes. For Val Plumwood, in her foundational text on
Feminism and the Mastery of Nature (1993), the fundamental binary of
domination is more particularly that of reason over nature, such that nature
is not only subordinate to but in the service of reason. Over the course of
capitalist and imperialist development, reason became a master identity,
but “the master identity is sensitive to context” (Mathews 2017, 59), be-
cause which social groups get placed closest to nature, in order to be in-
strumentalized for the groups placed closest to reason, will change according
to social and historical conditions. Thus, in the early American context, as
Annette Kolodny had already demonstrated in The Lay of the Land (1984),
this domination of nature took on the added dimension of authorizing the
colonial project and eventually the manifest destiny of settling the “wilder-
ness” of the western part of the continent (7).
In line with this reappraisal of early ecofeminist writers, Mendieta’s Si-
luetas do not celebrate a connection between women and nature but critique
the alignment of environmental and sexualized forms of domination. But the
Siluetas are also more exacting than general theories of domination by insist-
ing that environmental violence be understood not simply as domination
generally but as rape speciﬁcally. At stake here are not the claims that nature
is gendered or that violence is sexualized—claims that should, I think, be rel-
atively uncontroversial. Instead, Mendieta’s earthworks conceptualize the
form of environmental and sexual violence itself: a form that, I argue in the
following sections, iteratively uses forceful resource extraction for the pro-
duction of symbols memorializing vulnerability.
S I G N S
Autumn 2022
y
153

Rape works and earthworks
To date, the authoritative account of Mendieta’s early career remains Julia
Herzberg’s (1998) indispensable and insightful, but unpublished, PhD dis-
sertation. Herzberg was one of the ﬁrst to allow us to approach Mendieta’s
Siluetas in the context of her travels to Mexico and her subsequent engage-
ment with Indigenous iconography and cultures, especially as that iconogra-
phy would develop more recently in Afro-Caribbean rituals and religious
practices, including Santeria. In turn, these practices ﬁgure into Mendieta’s
own reclamation of a culture she felt separated from when, at age twelve, she
and her sister were sent from Cuba to be raised in Iowa as part of Operation
Peter Pan, the 1960–62 mass evacuation of Cuban minors sent by parents
alarmed by Fidel Castro’s parental policies.1 Her ﬁrst trip to Mexico was as
part of college ﬁeld research with the archaeologist Thomas Charlton in
the summer of 1971. Charlton brought Mendieta and other University of
Iowa students to ruins of the ancient Mesoamerican city of Teotihuacán,
and her encounter with pre-Columbian artifacts inﬂuenced the iconography
of her artwork in the following years. Her 1972 Feathers on Woman, in which
she glued chicken feathers to a model starting with her head and moving
downward, may reference the plumed serpent known in numerous Meso-
american religions by the name of Quetzalcoatl; several sculptures of the de-
ity populate the Temple of the Feathered Serpent, the third largest pyramid
at Teotihuacán and the earliest known evidence of its worship. Mendieta ex-
perimented with similar modiﬁcations of the body that year in her MFA the-
sis, which featured her “hair transplant” documentations in which she took
the beard and mustache of a male colleague and attached them to her face.
But whereas she framed that work in dialogue with Marcel Duchamp’s sim-
ilar gender reassignment of Mona Lisa in his 1917 L. H. O. O. Q., an Indig-
enous source for transformation across not only gender but species allowed
Mendieta to widen the thematic content of her work in Feathers on Woman.
1 In this section, I seek to bypass a tendency in Mendieta criticism to read her artwork
merely through this biographical lens, but an artistic biography helps bring out latent connec-
tions between her works. In attending to the formalism of Mendieta’s projects, I understand I
risk erasing the kinds of particularity she might—as a woman immigrant from Cuba, for in-
stance—have also been attempting to express through them. But I have been more concerned
by the tendency in cultural studies to legitimize ethnic and women’s art and literature as ex-
pression rather than aesthetic production, producing what Kandice Chuh calls “an overempha-
sis on minoritized writings as political or anthropological documents rather than artistic crea-
tions” (2019, 16). In this “segregation of aesthetics and politics,” in which artists of privilege
receive formalist analysis and minoritized artists are mined for what they represent or tell us
about their class status, “the aesthetics of minoritized literatures . . . have remained covered
over” (17).
154
y
Dango

I will return to the decolonial implications of this iconography in the follow-
ing section. For now, I want to highlight Mendieta’s simultaneous engage-
ment with, or intersecting of, gendered and racialized symbols. Mendieta’s
work comes at the beginning of a ten-year period in which Black feminists
in particular unpacked the racialized imaginary of rape in the United States,
inherited from a period of slavery in which the guilt of white rapists was pro-
jected onto Black men, creating the stereotype of the beast, and the legal im-
possibility of raping enslaved women created the stereotype of Black female
promiscuity. In and around books such as Michele Wallace’s Black Macho
and the Myth of the Superwoman (1979) and Angela Davis’s Women, Race,
and Class (1981) and Violence against Women and the Ongoing Challenge
to Racism (1985), scholars and activists showed how the racialized distribu-
tion of rapability and culpability was also instrumental in securing the auton-
omy and humanity of an emerging white middle class. At the conclusion of
her groundbreaking work on the Color of Rape (2001), Sujata Moorti turns
to art ﬁlms as a way of disrupting this legacy. Her case studies “do . . . not
show rape” (209) but “destabilize . . . the axis of rape narratives and present
a defamiliarized rape representation that requires the viewer to rethink
women outside of their object-victim status” (210). As I will return to later,
Mendieta’s work, which she documented in ﬁlm, forms a prehistory for the
feminist tradition Moorti explores, and her interest in the intersection of
gender and race was already evident in these student works that deployed In-
digenous references.
A more explicit engagement with pre-Columbian Mesoamerica began in
1973, when Mendieta’s mentor (and lover) in the newly formed MFA in
Intermedia, Hans Breder, brought a class to the Yagul archaeological site
in Oaxaca. She would return with the class the following summer as well.
Critics often call the image Mendieta produced in her ﬁrst summer, Untitled
(Image from Yagul), the ﬁrst Silueta, with Mendieta in a rocky terrain with
ﬂowers seeming to bloom from her body, visualizing a kind of interspecies
exchange of agency. But such an image, by including Mendieta’s body in
the image itself, is not, strictly speaking, a silhouette. For her part, Mendieta
has referred to her “ﬁrst” silhouette as being produced the following sum-
mer, when she outlined her body with blood in the Palace of the Six Patios,
a labyrinthine complex that was being actively excavated at Yagul in 1974
(quoted in Herzberg 1998, 223). For that image, Breder ﬁrst traced her
body in the dirt, then Mendieta dug a shallow recession in the dirt along
the outline and poured in chicken blood. She called it Laberinth Blood Im-
print, referencing the maze of ruins surrounding her installation.
The move from her body in the 1973 Untitled (Yagul) to her silhouette
in the 1974 Laberinth Blood Imprint was part of a series of developments
S I G N S
Autumn 2022
y
155

she made in her artistic practice in the intervening school year, when most of
her creative energy was focused on, even obsessed with, the visual iconogra-
phy of sexualized violence. On March 13, 1973, University of Iowa student
Sara Ann Ottens was found naked, bloodied, and strangled to death in her
dormitory. It would later be discovered that her accused murderer, a part-
time student James Wendall Hall, had not raped her before killing her, but
coverage of the incident at the time assumed sexual victimization. Shortly
after the incident, Mendieta invited students in her art class to her apartment,
where they discovered her naked, bent over a table, and covered in (chicken)
blood, reproducing the scene of Ottens’s death as it had been described in
the local newspapers. This Untitled (Rape Scene) is the performance art piece
related to sexual violence for which Mendieta would become most well
known in the following years.
But this initial engagement with rape, by reproducing a scene of violence
with her body as the victim, was only the ﬁrst of a rapidly mutating series of
works that Mendieta developed immediately before, and then in symbiotic
relation with, her Silueta series. At her ﬁnal exhibition at Iowa during course-
work that school year, she presented Dead on Street, in which the ﬂashes of a
camera alerted audience members leaving the show to her bloodied body in
the street. This introduced the theme of documentation, which became cen-
tral in subsequent works (she ﬁlmed many of her Siluetas on Super 8 ﬁlm,
a popular medium for home video production), but it most importantly
moved the scene of violence from the domestic space of the apartment to
the public sphere. Mendieta began to stage other violent scenes in public
spaces, including the alleyway next to her apartment, where she left blood
and tattered jeans; and the sidewalk in front of the Mofﬁt Building in down-
town Iowa City, where she left splashes of blood and then photographically
documented the reactions, frequently indifferent, of those who walked by.
In removing her body from the scenes and leaving only the props that had
been imprinted by a supposed violent event, Mendieta shifted the subject
of the artwork from the body of the victim to the spectators and bystanders
implicated in the scene of violence. This is to say, the focus of her art became
not the effects violence has on a private body but the effects—and, very often
and tragically, the lack of effects—it has on a public.
In removing the body from the visual economy of the rape image,
Mendieta was, in other words, doing something different than what Mieke
Bal (1990) has called the “rhetorical” displacement of rape. For Bal, “rape
itself cannot be visualized,” which she takes as an ontological fact more than
a social prohibition, because rape “takes place inside”—as an act of penetra-
tion of mind and body—and because “rape makes the victim invisible” by
physically covering her body and shattering her sense of self (141). If rape
156
y
Dango

cannot be seen, what becomes interesting is what can be. Bal looks at a pair of
paintings by Rembrandt that pick up on the story of Sextus Tarquin’s rape of
Lucretia by depicting not the rape itself but Lucretia’s act of suicide in re-
sponse to it. How to read the relation between suicide and rape? Bal provides
three options. First, it could be a metaphor, which by saying “one thing to
mean another” substitutes suicide for rape, with the effect of conveying
“the idea that the victim is responsible for her own destruction: she kills her-
self. The element self thus displaced the attention from rapist to the victim”
(142). Second, it could be a metonymy, which means the relation between
rape and suicide is one of association rather than replacement; here, rape
causes suicide, thus, suicide refers back to the rapist rather than displacing
his responsibility onto Lucretia as metaphor does. Third, we could interpret
the suicide as synecdoche, in which part stands in for whole, and therefore
“self-murder becomes the detail that represents the entire process” (143).
Here, “Lucretia’s act does not detract from the signiﬁcance of the rape
but is part of her position as victim, thus emphasizing the perpetrator’s re-
sponsibility” (143). As I will argue in the following section, Mendieta is in-
vested in metaphor, although her making “one thing to mean another” is
about mirroring structures of violence rather than looking away from them.
But Mendieta is not trying to look away but to look toward, here toward the
public, who oversee violence. In turn, she moves beyond Bal’s victim/per-
petrator dyad and focuses on a third ﬁgure, the bystander or witness.
After her return from Oaxaca that summer, Mendieta continued to ex-
pand the scope of her documentation of violence by considering not only
the urban environment of streets, alleyways, and sidewalks but also the seem-
ingly natural environment of the surrounding area. In fall 1973, she recreated
the bloodied body of her earlier Untitled (Rape Scene) in a wooded area.
This new Rape Piece included the documentation not only of her body
but of the foliage around it, which, too, had been stained by the blood she
used on her body. In October of that year, she also created a scene of blood-
ied Mattresses in an empty farmhouse. When Charles Ray, who was also
studying at the University of Iowa, discovered the scene, he reported to
his classmates that he thought he had stumbled onto a real scene of violence.
Throughout her documentations of violence, whether with her body or
without it, blood was Mendieta’s constant medium. But she began to be es-
pecially interested in the signiﬁcance of blood when the body was not pre-
sent. In an earlier work from 1972, Chicken Piece, she had held a just-
decapitated chicken in front of her nude body, which in turn collected the
splatters of blood as if it were a canvas for the Jackson Pollocks of the previ-
ous generation. But with a work like Mattresses, what became important was
how blood referenced a body’s destruction precisely through its absence. To
S I G N S
Autumn 2022
y
157

make blood visible requires opening up a body. But the mutilated body
haunts rather than grounds a work like Mattresses, introducing a new theme
of spectrality.
In the spring of 1974, immediately before the second trip to Oaxaca and
the production of what she would call her ﬁrst Silueta, the Laberinth Blood
Imprint, Mendieta made Blood Sign #1 and Blood Sign #2. In these works,
she traced the outlines of her body onto a studio wall using buckets of animal
blood as her paint and her hands as brushes. In marking the shape of her
body with blood, she turned the absence of her body into a form of ab-
straction, expanding on the spectrality of the Mattresses by making absence
into a kind of presence: the presence of a sign. What the Laberinth Blood Im-
print does is take a work like the Blood Signs and move it outdoors, just as
Mendieta moved from the private space of her apartment to the public spaces
of the street and eventually the environmental spaces of the surrounding
woods. In turn, the Laberinth Blood Imprint represents a combination of her
gradual move from interior to exterior and her gradual removal of the body
to make it an abstract sign. I return to the Laberinth Blood Imprint as Men-
dieta documented it on ﬁlm in the following section, but I ﬁrst take the in-
vitation of her naming the intermediate pieces “signs” to reﬂect on the kind
of abstraction and signifying at stake in the Siluetas.
Indexing the rape of the earth
In an inﬂuential two-part essay on “Seventies Art in America” published in
1977, Rosalind Krauss considers a wide range of contemporary artworks
in sculpture and installation as meditating on the concept of the “index.”
She glosses the term—developed most extensively by the pragmatist Charles
Sanders Peirce ﬁrst in an 1867 essay and then more extensively in a series of
lectures and letters in the early 1900s—as “marks or traces of a particular
cause, and that cause is the thing to which they refer, the object they signify”
(Krauss 1977a, 70). One of the examples she looks at, for instance, is the cast
shadow, which does not represent its object but refers to and is caused by it,
much like how a footprint is the trace of a foot but does not itself represent a
foot or smoke is the mark of ﬁre but does not itself look like ﬁre. One of
Peirce’s early examples of an index, which may seem counterintuitive but
is now taken by many, including Krauss, as paradigmatic, is a photograph.
As Peirce explains in perhaps his most frequently cited passage, which Krauss
also quotes: “Photographs, especially instantaneous photographs, are very
instructive, because we know that they are in certain respects exactly like
the objects they represent. But this resemblance is due to the photographs
having been produced under such circumstances that they were physically
158
y
Dango

forced to correspond point by point to nature” ([1894] 1998, 6; quoted in
Krauss 1977b, 63). Photographs are an index because they are the chemi-
cal imprint of what they refer to, and this is what makes them different from,
say, a painting, which may similarly look like what it depicts but was not physi-
cally caused by it.
Krauss thought that many other media in the 1970s were beginning to
model themselves after photography in terms of aiming for an indexical rela-
tion to objects. The appeal, she writes, was that this indexical relation was “un-
coded” and a photograph was “sub- or pre-symbolic, ceding the language of
art back to the imposition of things”; other art forms similarly attempted to
“substitute the registration of sheer physical presence for the more highly ar-
ticulated language of aesthetic conventions (and the kind of history they en-
code)” (Krauss 1977a, 75, 81). An index does not come weighted with the
history of form or the arbitrariness of language. It functions not as symbol
but as selection, not representing the world but—like how a photograph
frames or crops part of the visible—merely pointing to some aspect of it.
In an important essay on Peirce and visual analysis, Michael Leja (2000)
pushes back against this insistence on the brute physicality of the index, an
insistence he believes is naive in underestimating the persistence of the sym-
bolic and the impossibility of the “uncoded” relation, the inescapability of
those “aesthetic conventions.” Jackson Pollock’s paint spatters, Leja’s con-
cluding example, may seem mere imprints of his gestures, the simple effects of
his arm swinging paint against a canvas. But the point, Leja says, is that they’re
on a canvas, and this invokes aesthetic convention at the same time as it claims
to eschew it. In a thought experiment invoking a setting germane to Mendieta’s
works in dirt, Leja proposes: “Imagine Jackson Pollock lying on the beach and
leaving traces in the sand by virtue of moving his arms and hands as he reclines.
Now compare these traces of arm movements on the beach with the painted
records of his arm movements in his paintings. The identical physical move-
ment will produce two different forms of index with two different signiﬁ-
cances. Whereas the mark in the sand may stand simply as evidence of a move-
ment, the painted line made within a frame by the identical movement will be
simultaneously and necessarily a symbolic gesture” (119).
Peirce, for his part, acknowledges that “it would be difﬁcult if not impos-
sible to instance an absolutely pure index, or to ﬁnd any sign absolutely de-
void of indexical quality” (1932, 306). In the 1867 essay from which the ma-
jority of art critics and media theorists have developed accounts of the index,
Peirce offers three types of signs. In addition to an index, which has a “real”
connection to its object, usually by way of causation, a sign could be an icon,
which looks like the object, or a symbol, which refers to its object by way of
convention. In his more mature reﬂections on the sign in the early 1900s,
S I G N S
Autumn 2022
y
159

Peirce moves away from a tripartite taxonomy of three different types of
signs and toward three different functions of a sign. The basic division re-
mains the same—icon, index, symbol—but the point is that a single sign
can be functionally both iconic and indexical, for instance, as is a photo-
graph: sure, it’s indexical in that it was chemically caused by its object, but
the photograph also looks like its object, iconically. This crisscrossing of re-
lations between object, sign, and interpretation is staged dramatically in Ana
Mendieta’s work, which, in turn, complicates Krauss’s account of indexical
art; although of the same period that Krauss surveys—“Seventies Art”—
Mendieta offers not a pure index but a mixing and cross-hatching of semi-
otic functions. Take the original Rape Scene staged in her apartment in
1972. Blood is an index of violence, as violence has produced its appearance
in the opening up of the body. But the blood on Mendieta’s body is not itself
an index, as it was not violence against her, or against a human body, that
produced it. Rather, it is chicken blood she bought at a local butcher. So
she is actually representing a rape scene iconically but representing the scene
as an index of rape. She is not representing the rape itself but the effects rape
has on bodies, bloodied—and rooms, disarrayed.
In contrast, the Laberinth Blood Imprint is in many ways an index, and
made in dirt, it is even of the paradigmatic kind of index that Peirce gives
us in the footprint in the sand or that Leja offers in the thought experiment
of Jackson Pollock thrashing about on the beach. But the outline of Men-
dieta’s body is not present because she lay there and imprinted the sand with
her shape but because she dug into the dirt to make the sign. Upon ﬁrst look-
ing at the outline, we are likely to take it as a representation of a body rather
than an index of it. Or, if we take the form not as a representation of Men-
dieta but as a more abstract representation of, say, the feminine, then we take
it as a symbol, in the same way we would take ♀as a symbol. What becomes
interesting is how Mendieta has produced this symbol through an indexical
relation to the earth. Scholars have tended to stress the imprinting of the
feminine form in the earth as bringing the feminine and the earth into sym-
biosis or even equivalence.2 But the point is that the feminine form is actually
produced through a violence on the earth, through a cutting into the earth.
The feminine is not a reﬂection of the earth but a product of the earth’s ma-
nipulation, even mutilation.
2 This is the so-called essentialist reading of Mendieta’s work. For a summary of these de-
bates, see the introduction to Viso (2004). For inﬂuential challenges to the essentialist reading,
see especially Kwon (1994) and Best (2007). For the poststructuralist defense of Mendieta—
that her work stages not a static essence but a performative contingency of identity categories—
see especially Blocker (1999).
160
y
Dango

What this brings out is that the same thing can be a sign of many different
things. You could take these printed words as signs (symbols) of my think-
ing, but you could also take them as signs (indices) of a printing process.
This was one of the reasons Peirce became obsessed in the latter part of
his life with analyzing the many different possibilities of what he called
“interpretants” ([1906] 1998, 477). Krauss, in calling something an index,
is talking about its relation to the object to which it refers. Leja, in talking
about how we approach a canvas differently than we do a stretch of beach, is
talking about how we take up and interpret it; we summon a set of conven-
tions for canvases that we don’t bother to summon for beaches. Krauss and
Leja don’t necessarily disagree; they’re just talking about different things.
To take the example of a footprint in the sand: what matters to Krauss is that
it was produced by an actual foot stepping there, a foot to which the foot-
print existentially points, whereas for Leja, what matters is how the footprint
is understood by someone walking by; for instance, whether its shape is val-
ued in and of itself, or whether the person walking by begins to wonder
about the foot that made it, or whether, perhaps, as a detective, to wonder
whether the footprint leads to a murder suspect. For approaching a sign as
an index is a different matter than whether the sign was existentially pro-
duced as an index. If we take the footprint as an index, it points us to the
existence of the foot that made it, but it does not point us to many of the
qualities of that foot, like whether it was hairy or had been recently bathed
with scented soap, or even the person to whom it belongs, like their age or
what shirt they were wearing that day. So, too, if we think of the footprint as
an index, a lot of its qualities will not matter to us—for instance the color of
the sand in which it is imprinted. That tells us about the sand; it doesn’t tell
us about the foot.
What matters to Peirce in the “interpretant” is how the sign focuses our
understanding. The point of thinking about three different functions of a
sign in his later writings is to provide a pragmatic foundation for the division
of signs, the different uses to which they can be put, or the different effects
they will, in time, have on interpretants. Thus, he talks of indices as “more or
less detailed directions for what the hearer is to do in order to place himself
in direct experiential or other connection with the thing meant” or a “kind
of sign which shall act dynamically upon the hearer’s attention and direct it
to a special object or occasion” (Peirce 1932, 336; quoted in Freadman
2004, 120). All indices point to something; they therefore say to someone,
“Hey, look here!” As Anne Freadman (2004) glosses the transition in her in-
dispensable book on Peirce’s semiotics, “The focus is now on semiosis as pro-
cess, rather than on the sign as entity” (171). The effect was to think of signs
as overseeing a primarily temporal and diachronic procedure rather than a
S I G N S
Autumn 2022
y
161

synchronic spatiality in which, say, signiﬁed 5 signiﬁer. Semiotics in turn be-
came an investigation—and this sense of investigation will be important for
the detective aesthetic of Mendieta’s cinematic documentations of her
Siluetas, discussed below—and the particular investigation provoked by
the index is one that can open up what Peirce calls “the common environ-
ment of the interlocutors” ([1903] 1998b, 281). In giving directions, the
index also gives a common object for all to look at. In his 1903 lectures at
Harvard on the “Algebra of Logic,” Peirce discussed as one index a landmark
such as the Bunker Hill Monument, whose designer, according to Peirce,
said he meant for “it to say simply, ‘Here!’ It just stands on that ground
and plainly is not movable. So if we are looking for the battle-ﬁeld, it will
tell us whither to direct our steps” (Peirce [1903] 1998a, 163; quoted in
Freadman 2004, 125).
Mendieta’s Siluetas appear as monuments in this sense; they seem to des-
ignate a space and, in their indexicality, seem to say “Look here!” And yet, it
may seem unclear at ﬁrst what instructions Mendieta’s Siluetas afford; it may
seem that they present the impossibility of a common environment rather
than its facilitation. It is not just that Mendieta stages a problem of commu-
nication across cultural difference in, for instance, her use—some have said
appropriation (Hyacinthe 2019)—of Afro-Caribbean religious images with
which many spectators would be unfamiliar, and with which she herself was
unfamiliar before she began to employ them; or across historical difference,
in her use of Indigenous images and contexts ﬁlmed on a then fairly new
technology, the Super 8 home movie camera. It is also that we do not know
at ﬁrst what Freadman would call its “genre” (2004, 125); we know the
Siluetas, as indices, point to something, but point to what? In the midst of
what Lauren Berlant (2018) might call the index’s “genre ﬂail,” the index
also becomes what Mary Ann Doane (2007), in her contribution to a special
issue on indexicality that she coedited for differences, calls “eminently ex-
ploitable” (148). Faced with an indeterminate index, not deﬁnitely pointing
to X or even a category of X, we are led to imagine its referential object, to
construct its genre. Such an insight partially underwrites the uptake of
indexicality in critical race theory, because whereas (for instance) a photo-
graph of people of color might seem to index race, it in fact produces race
(Mirzoeff 2003). The body cannot be an index of race, since race has no bi-
ological substrate; rather, race is produced through our engagement with
the photograph, and we retroactively implant it as a cause rather than effect.
As Tina Campt (2012) puts it, “photography serves a critical function in ma-
terializing race as a visible attribute of human difference by simultaneously
producing and propagating it as a meaningful category of humanity” (49).
Campt’s term for this phenomenon, the “performative index,” also applies
162
y
Dango

to the way in which photographs may aspirationally produce forms of rela-
tionality that they ofﬁcially claim only to document; a photograph might
“enact . . . and thereby produce . . . the very forms of subjectivity and linkage
it appear[s] to record” (162).
This performative indexicality, as well as its ramiﬁcations for the produc-
tion of social difference, both gendered and racialized, is dramatically staged
in Mendieta’s Super 8 documentation of what she called her ﬁrst in the se-
ries, the Laberinth Blood Imprint, in the summer of 1974.3 The Silueta is
in the central room of a labyrinth, the rocky walls of the maze still upright
and affording only certain paths of movement. The video begins at a dis-
tance from the Silueta itself, elsewhere in the ruins and along a path that
may eventually lead to the central room but that has no immediate view of
it. The camera looks down at the dirt pathway, at an angle that emphasizes
the path itself rather than where it leads, like looking down at one’s feet
for something dropped there. But the handheld camera is especially shaky,
making it hard to focus on or ﬁnd whatever object has been misplaced,
and so we are encouraged to read the ground itself, to see it not as some sur-
face on which an interesting object could be placed but as the object itself,
warranting close reading. One of the only cuts in the sequence happens early,
when a sudden shot of one of the walls ﬂanking the path is replaced by the
shot of the path itself. The camera zooms in to such a degree, it takes a
few seconds of movement to reveal that the surface, with all its detail, is
the rocky wall itself, and we seem invited to read its every crook and shadow.
Eventually, the camera pans back to the pathway, this time at a higher angle,
looking more straight ahead as the camera, too, moves forward as we walk
down the path. But the camera gets distracted from its movement and again
looks down and to the sides of the walls. The shaky camera, the slow and hes-
itant nature of the walking, and the too-close reading invited by the atten-
tion to surface all work together to create a sort of detective aura and almost
a sense of suspense: an anxiety that everything could matter (because every-
thing could be a clue) at the same time that something surprising (a bad sur-
prise) may lurk around the corner.
The second and ﬁnal cut in the sequence is from another close-up shot of
the wall to the interior of the labyrinth. We are at ﬁrst peering around a cor-
ner and now glimpse the Silueta on the ground. Is this what we were look-
ing for? It explains our attention to the ground and the walls, as if we were
searching for this outline and knew it could be somewhere, or anywhere, that
3 I join a recent trend in Mendieta scholarship to center her cinematic practice of docu-
menting her works. See Joseph et al. (2015).
S I G N S
Autumn 2022
y
163

it was not going to be an object hung on the wall like a painting. As we walk
into the center of the labyrinth, the camera ﬁrst looks to the sides of the
room, away from the Silueta, as if still scanning the space for other clues, other
aspects to focus on. But ﬁnding nothing—or, perhaps, ﬁnding there is no
danger, that no one else is here—we pan back to the Silueta and, in getting
closer and slowly circling around it, make out some of its features: the circle
and horizontal lines that iconize a head and outstretched arms; a bulbous
midsection atop two ovals that suggest legs. The body is oriented away from
us—the head closest to the camera, the feet furthest away—and its outline is
ﬁlled with blood.
At one point, the camera again looks up, at a separate entrance into (or
exit from) the room, perhaps conﬁrming again that no danger lurks. The
camera, too, remains hesitant in its approach to the Silueta, at one point
backing away before ﬁnally building the courage—if not quite the nerve
to stabilize the frame itself, which continues to shake—to approach the
bloody imprint and circle completely around to the other side to look at it
in what we might call its proper orientation, standing up. Here the imprint
recalls the Blood Signs in which Mendieta used blood on her hands to make
shapes on the wall, her body and her canvas aligned and oriented in the same
direction. Such an orientation is aspirational in this video rather than pro-
vided; it is the work of overcoming hesitation, uncertainty, and fear to ﬁnally
position yourself in such a way that the imprint could be your shadow, could
be mirroring you.
The camera’s hesitant approach to the object, its scouting for clues, posi-
tions us at ﬁrst as a detective coming upon a crime scene, like the original
rape scene Mendieta had staged in her apartment. Coming upon the object,
the blood indexes a violent crime that has happened. But here there is an
added difference: for unlike the apartment that Mendieta rented and there-
fore had a right to disorganize, and unlike the studios in which she was au-
thorized to perform her Blood Signs works, this archaeological site does not
invite her artistic manipulation. In turn, the outline that seems to index a
crime of violence also is a crime of desecration. This literally is a crime scene,
in other words, and not only the index of some other crime of violence.
In emphasizing a supposed essentialist connection between women and
nature, or in emphasizing Mendieta’s use of Indigenous spaces as a mode of
connecting to a cultural heritage from which historical colonialism and con-
temporary anti-Cuban sentiment had severed her, critics have tended to
overlook the violence that Mendieta not only represents but herself per-
forms: against the Indigenous space she desecrates and against the nature
she manipulates, not only in the digging up of land but also in the decapi-
tation of the chicken whose blood is poured into the land. The violence on
164
y
Dango

the land takes on allegorical meaning in the crisscrossing of iconic, indexical,
and symbolic interpretants. The blood looks like human blood, marking an
iconic connection; it is the effect of and points backward to the violence that
produced it, indexing the violence against nature and nonhuman animals
and forming a human shape, but an abstract one that cannot quite be re-
ferred to any one individual; the blood symbolizes a collective human sub-
ject, something like mankind. And yet the form also indexes Mendieta’s
body, since it is carved into the ground as her silhouette, and so the symbol
is not quite universal, not quite Mankind in the universal, but therefore mas-
culine, understanding. Although we are led by the camera’s detective gaze
to read the form like a crime subject outline, it is instead a symbol of the
victimization of some portion of humanity.
Together, these elements point to a kind of violence whose purpose is the
production of symbols: a violence against nature that also looks like a vio-
lence against humans to symbolically create victimization. Both the violence
against nature and against humans are brought together in the coformation
of the symbol, which in turn suggests their similarities. Both convert raw ma-
terial into symbolic value; or really, the violence is this conversion itself, the
opening up of land and body for symbolic use. That is to say, the silhouette
does not make an essentialist conﬂation of woman and nature but instead
aligns two structures of violence. For both, there is a double theater of vio-
lence: ﬁrst the violence against nature or bodies, but then second the symbol
of victimization that the silhouette memorializes. The symbol says not only
that this earth and this human ﬁgure have been raped but also that the earth
in general, and humans generally, are eminently rapable. If it is a monument,
in the indexical sense explored by Peirce and Freadman, it is one that points
to, or threatens, victimization, like a head on a pike warns the visitor to be-
ware it could be their head, too.
Mary Mellor (2017) has written about “the common experience of ex-
ploitation, damage, and marginalization that women and the natural world
share” (89). Modern economies rely on “externalization,” which Mellor de-
ﬁnes as the “failure of formal economic accounting to ‘cost in’ the work of
nature or women’s work” (90). Writing in another context, Rachel Fraser
(2020) has also turned to an economic conceptualization of rape by way
of critiquing the dominance of trauma narratives in discourses of sexual vio-
lence, not only because witnessing trauma may recreate trauma but because
this framework may disenable other perspectives, too: “Rape traumatizes,
yes, but it does other things too. It might, for example, prove useful to think
of the labor extracted by sexual violence—the labor of caring and recovery,
of managing fear, of checking the backseat—rather than of the trauma it in-
ﬂicts.” The Siluetas, too, are about labor: they show the iterative extraction
S I G N S
Autumn 2022
y
165

of value from bodies earthen and human in order to symbolize the perma-
nent condition of possible victimization.
This leaves us with two ways of interpreting the hesitant, but ﬁnal, iden-
tiﬁcation of the camera with the symbol, the taking up of a position as if the
silhouette is one’s shadow. On the one hand, it is a hesitant identiﬁcation
with the symbol of victimization. On the other hand, it may be to take up
the position of one who has authored this victimization, the one whose con-
version of raw material into symbolic value is before us. Here, we take up the
position of complicity in a structure of violence, and the looks away and awry
are like a bystander’s efforts to avoid accountability. What the co-presence of
two competing indexical interpretants provides is the knowledge of their
actual inseparability, or the artiﬁciality of the separation. What the Silueta
shows is that a position that dominates today may be dominated tomorrow,
for no body is exempt from vulnerability; indeed, a desire both to control
and be controlled may be within each of us, just as the camera is both afraid
of ﬁnding a crime scene around the corner and yet eager to go looking for it.
In this dual staging of perpetrator and victim, Mendieta’s camera antici-
pates the cinematographic form of the slasher ﬁlms that would take America
by storm in the next couple of years—in which movies like the 1978 Hallow-
een have us alternately occupy the perspective of the sadist and the victim, as
Linda Williams (1991) has demonstrated in a groundbreaking article—and
also echoes an earlier art ﬁlm on the relation of the camera to forms of abuse,
Yoko Ono’s Film No. 5 (Rape or Chase), more commonly known by the sim-
pler and provocative title, Rape (1969). For that ﬁlm, Ono instructed a camera-
man in London to relentlessly follow and ﬁlm a twenty-one-year-old woman
from Austria for three days. The crew received the consent of the subject’s
sister beforehand, but she herself was unaware of the setup and became in-
creasingly distressed by the attention. The ﬁlm is not just a representation of
violation but is itself a violation, a nonconsensual encroachment of personal
space and autonomy, although not the violation named in the ﬁlm’s title.
Joan Kee (2016) argues that the ﬁlm was called “rape” because “there was
yet no language to describe what was talking place”: stalking, the action this
ﬁlm performs, “was not yet a legal concept in Britain” (192). In turn, the ﬁlm
has a complicated politics; it victimizes a woman, but in turn it also makes
visible, raises consciousness about, a form of victimization that was, to the
law and to the ofﬁcial culture of which it is an instrument, invisible.
The legal perspective introduces a further complication, however, and
one that helps bring out a further dimension of Mendieta’s project. As Joan
Hawkins (2000) explains in her analysis of the ﬁlm, it matters that the object
of stalking is not only a woman, thereby enabling a gendered allegory of
men’s belief in their access to women’s bodies, but an Austrian woman in
166
y
Dango

England, lacking both proﬁciency in English and the proper documents au-
thorizing her stay. “Certainly the gaze of the camera goes a long way toward
emphasizing (for the audience) her status as foreign, ‘exotic’ Other,” Haw-
kins explains (134). In thus staging the collusion of patriarchy and imperial-
ism, Rape provides a proto-intersectional account of systems of subjugation.
In Laberinth Blood Imprint, too, the fact that rape iconography is produced
as a desecration of Indigenous spaces suggests that what partially mediates
between the alignment of environmental and sexual violence is the specter
of colonialism, itself a process of rending apart bodies, natural and human
alike. In cycling through the positions of perpetrator and victim, the camera
documenting Laberinth Blood Imprint stages the inheritance of this legacy
as one that continues to produce harm in the present.
Importantly, this cycling through positions of perpetrator and victim, in
order to access a more fundamental ambivalence that cannot simply resolve
into one or the other, is not one of empathetic exchange, in which, for in-
stance, we experience the emotional reality of a rape survivor or perpetrator.
Angelique Szymanek (2016), writing in this journal, has criticized how
Mendieta’s Rape Scene is often read as “an empathetic activist gesture” that
detracts from the ways in which Mendieta in fact rejects empathy and wit-
nessing as the grounds for “civic duty and moral certitude” (904). Similarly,
Laberinth Blood Imprint does not give us subject positions to inhabit but
symbolic vantage points from which to have a structural perspective. In thus
focusing on a structure of violence, Mendieta also moves beyond the indi-
vidualized psychological terms in which rape is usually understood, whether
in discussions of empathetic bystanders or, more frequently, the consent or
nonconsent of participants in a sexualized scene. Instead, Mendieta has us fo-
cus on our relation to symbolic structures. To shift the focus from empathy
to symbol, from interiority to structure, is not to claim some dispassionate
or neutral viewing practice. Writing about the Rape Scene, Leticia Alvarado
(2015) has argued that “Mendieta makes visible the Kantian expectation of
a disinterested spectator but also the violence and complacency inherent in
the passive contemplation of the taste-bearing subject of judgment” (79).
The hesitant camera work documenting Laberinth Blood Imprint similarly
rebuffs the expectation of disinterestedness. What we see instead are our own
investments in the production of symbols of harm, our desire to go looking
for it, like detectives, however sheepishly we round the corner of the maze.
What Mendieta’s indexical practice does, however, is disappoint the de-
sire to go looking for expressions of personal trauma as the index of rape.
In departing from individualized trauma, what I want to emphasize here is
not that Mendieta is uncaring about the individual victim, and indeed we
can read the gesture of making a silhouette, of putting this body into the
S I G N S
Autumn 2022
y
167

frame, as one of particularizing the universal. But what the Silueta says is
that, from the perspective of structure, individuals are interchangeable, not
because their psychological experience is the same but because their symbolic
functioning is the same, just as the scars of coal mining symbolize not only
that particular violence against nature but man’s dominion over nature in gen-
eral. This interchangeability was evident in Mendieta’s ﬁrst intuition to place
her own body in the place of Sara Ann Ottens’s. Her increasing moves to ab-
straction, ﬁrst to blood without bodies, then to the blood tracks in the studio,
and ﬁnally in the ﬁlled forms like in Laberinth Blood Imprint, are evolving re-
alizations of the abstract valence of violence, its immediate end the violence
itself but its ﬁnal end the forming of lasting symbols that memorialize it. At
the same time, it again matters that it is through the desecration of Indige-
nous space that environmental and sexual violence are aligned, for colonial
violence as a means of securing the symbol of the rapability of the body tells
a story about whose and what kinds of harm can be memorialized or, as Ju-
dith Butler (2009) might say, “grievable.” That is to say, although all bodies
can be violated, only some bodies are culturally understood as rapable, and
the exclusion of the colonized body is repeated in the way in which this ac-
tual desecration of Indigenous space is not taken up or interpreted as an in-
dex of colonial violence.
In this way, Mendieta’s work is a kind of obverse to how the conceptual
and performance artist Adrian Piper would develop indexicality in the fol-
lowing decade. In a pair of lectures on “Xenophobia and the Indexical Pre-
sent” presented in 1989 and 1992, Piper explained her efforts to immerse
her audience in the “concrete, immediate here-and-now” she called the “in-
dexical present” (1999, 247). The idea was to get people to engage with her
as a Black woman without the intermediation of an abstract concept like
Blackness: “xenophobia can be overcome by focusing on the speciﬁc, unique,
concrete qualities of individuals” (257) in a “direct and immediate experience
of the complexity of the other” (248). In contrast, Mendieta seeks not to dis-
mantle intermediary concepts but to abstract from her body’s imprint in the
dirt a new kind of concept that can relate structures of violence. Furthermore,
whereas Piper would go on to say that her strategy for combatting sexism was
different from her strategy for combatting racism—because the kind of inter-
personal intimacy that could overcome the latter was often an “obstacle to
liberation from sexism” when women are, precisely through their intimate
relationships, conscripted into patriarchal gender roles (247)—Mendieta’s
indexical practice uses this conceptual space to intersect, rather than disen-
tangle, these structures.
Because the Siluetas form a series, they also suggest the iterative structure
of environmental and sexual violence, the way a memorial to domination
168
y
Dango

over earth and body is propped up by the continued exercise of extracting
symbolic value. For what environmental and sexual violence both seek to deny
is a larger symbiotic relationship in which humans and nature and humans
themselves are entangled. Ecologically, humanity is part of nature, but the
man/nature binary emerges from a disavowal of this entanglement, in the tak-
ing up of a position of mastery that morphs the circular shape of an ecological
circuit into the oppositional shape of a dichotomy. So, too, does sexual vio-
lence create a victim/perpetrator binary by disavowing the actual vulnerability
of all bodies and the fundamental ambivalence at the heart of sexuality, in
which drives to sadism and to masochism are mutually constitutive within a
single psyche. But because the underlying fact of entanglement and ambiva-
lence is permanent, this exercise of erecting binaries—so that one is not both a
part of nature and outside of it, or both dominant and submissive—requires a
sequential, iterative rehearsal. The symbolic differentiation of two bodies, the
splitting of ambivalence and entanglement into a neater economy of opposi-
tion, must be elaborately performed. In thus both performing and memorializ-
ing violence as an iterative extraction of bodies for the purpose of producing
symbols, Mendieta dramatizes and visualizes the alignment of environmen-
tal and sexual violence at the level of structure.
Metaphoric discourse: A coda
In saying environmental and sexual violence are aligned in a structure that
iterates the forceful conversion of raw bodies into symbolic value, and in
pointing to, by indexing, the shared features of this structure in reducing
circular ecologies—both planetary and psychological—to binary pairs, Men-
dieta’s Laberinth Blood Imprint advances a new function for metaphor spe-
ciﬁcally and aesthetic discourse generally. What metaphoric thinking opens
up through this earthwork is a space in which environmental and sexual
ﬁelds can speak to one another in coauthoring a theory of rape. By saying en-
vironmental degradation and sexual violence are both rape, the earthwork
does not look away from rape but instead generates a new concept of rape
that can intersect two domains of domination.
This essentially conceptual function of art differs from the task art is most
often called upon to perform in discussions of sexual violence: expressing or
representing the emotional experience of survivors. Especially when viewed
in relation to other discourses—in particular, the legal discourse that has mo-
nopolized the conceptualization of rape in the past generation—aesthetic
discourse is tasked with humanizing impersonal abstractions. The law con-
verts personal experience into other metrics, especially in determining the se-
verity of harm, or the years in jail, or dollars in punitive damages that an event
S I G N S
Autumn 2022
y
169

of rape warrants. In contrast to this mode of quantiﬁcation, art is supposed to
return us to the lived experience of actual people (Peters 2005). But this de-
fense of art has tended to overlook the kinds of abstract thinking art itself per-
forms—and is good at performing. In conceptualizing rape at the level of
structure, Mendieta does not deny the importance and legitimacy of emo-
tional forms of expression. But Mendieta’s work is able to visualize harm
even without requiring that survivors do the emotional labor of making
themselves available for empathy; it preserves the importance of personal ex-
perience by making it inessential to the structural conception of harm it theo-
rizes. Mendieta’s earthworks embrace abstraction and metaphoric thinking
to expand rather than narrow our understanding of the theaters of violence.
English and Media Studies
Beloit College
References
Alvarado, Leticia. 2015. “‘. . . Towards a Personal Will to Continue Being “Other”’:
Ana Mendieta’s Abject Performances.” Journal of Latin American Cultural Stud-
ies 24(1):65–85.
Bal, Mieke. 1990. “Visual Poetics: Reading with the Other Art.” In Theory between
the Disciplines: Authority/Vision/Politics, edited by Martin Kreiswirth and Mark A.
Cheetham, 135–50. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Berlant, Lauren. 2018. “Genre Flailing.” Capacious: Journal for Emerging Affect
Theory 1(2):156–62.
Best, Susan. 2007. “The Serial Spaces of Ana Mendieta.” Art History 30(1):57–82.
Blocker, Jane. 1999. Where Is Ana Mendieta? Identity, Performativity, and Exile.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Butler, Judith. 2009. Frames of War: When Is Life Grievable? London: Verso.
Campt, Tina M. 2012. Image Matters: Archive, Photography, and the African Dias-
pora in Europe. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Chuh, Kandice. 2019. The Difference Aesthetics Makes: On the Humanities “After
Man.” Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Davis, Angela Y. 1981. Women, Race, and Class. New York: Vintage.
———. 1985. Violence against Women and the Ongoing Challenge to Racism.
Latham, NY: Kitchen Table.
Doane, Mary Ann. 2007. “The Indexical and the Concept of Medium Speciﬁcity.”
differences 18(1):128–52.
Estévez-Saá, Margarita, and María Jesús Lorenzo-Modia. 2018. “The Ethics and
Aesthetics of Eco-Caring: Contemporary Debates on Ecofeminism(s).” Women’s
Studies 47(2):123–46.
Film No. 5 (Rape or Chase). 1969. Directed by Yoko Ono and John Lennon. Vienna:
Austrian TV Österreichischer Rundfunk.
170
y
Dango

Fraser, Rachel. 2018. “The Ethics of Metaphor.” Ethics 128(4):728–55.
———. 2020. “Rape Fantasies.” The Point Magazine, January 28. https://
thepointmag.com/criticism/rape-fantasies/.
Freadman, Anne. 2004. The Machinery of Talk: Charles Peirce and the Sign Hypoth-
esis. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Gaard, Greta. 2011. “Ecofeminism Revisited: Rejecting Essentialism and Re-
placing Species in a Material Feminist Environmentalism.” Feminist Formations
23(2):26–53.
Hawkins, Joan. 2000. Cutting Edge: Art-Horror and the Horriﬁc Avant-Garde.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Herzberg, Julia. 1998. “Ana Mendieta, the Iowa Years: A Critical Study, 1969
through 1977.” Doctoral dissertation, City University of New York. https://
academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_etds/1431.
Hyacinthe, Genevieve. 2019. Radical Virtuosity: Ana Mendieta and the Black At-
lantic. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Joseph, Laura Wertheim, Lynn Lukkas, Raquel Cecilia Mendieta, John Perreault, Mi-
chael Rush, and Rachel Weiss. 2015. Covered in Time and History: The Films of
Ana Mendieta. Edited by Howard Oransky. Oakland: University of California Press.
Kee, Joan. 2016. “Art Chasing Law: The Case of Yoko Ono’s Rape.” Law and Lit-
erature 28(2):187–208.
Kolodny, Annette. 1984. The Lay of the Land: Metaphor as Experience and History in
American Life and Letters. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Krauss, Rosalind. 1977a. “Notes on the Index: Seventies Art in America.” October 3:
68–81.
———. 1977b. “Notes on the Index: Seventies Art in America; Part 2.” October 4:
58–67.
Kwon, Miwon. 1994. “Bloody Valentines: Afterimages by Ana Mendieta.” In Inside
the Visible: An Elliptical Traverse of Twentieth-Century Art in, of, and from the
Feminine, edited by Catherine de Zegher, 165–71. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Leja, Michael. 2000. “Peirce, Visuality, and Art.” Representations 72: 97–122.
Mathews, Freya. 2017. “The Dilemma of Dualism.” In Routledge Handbook of
Gender and Environment, edited by Sherilyn MacGregor, 54–70. New York:
Routledge.
Mellor, Mary. 2017. “Ecofeminist Political Economy: A Green and Feminist Agenda.”
In Routledge Handbook of Gender and Environment, edited by Sherilyn Mac-
Gregor, 86–100. New York: Routledge.
Merchant, Carolyn. 1990. The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientiﬁc
Revolution. 2nd edition. New York: HarperOne.
Mirzoeff, Nicholas. 2003. “The Shadow and the Substance: Photography and In-
dexicality in American Photography.” In Only Skin Deep: Changing Visions of the
American Self, International Center for Photography, edited by Coco Fusco and
Brian Wallis, 111–27. New York: International Center of Photography.
Moorti, Sujatha. 2001. The Color of Rape: Gender and Race in Television’s Public
Spheres. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
S I G N S
Autumn 2022
y
171

Peirce, Charles Sanders. (1867) 1992. “On a New List of Categories (1867).” In
The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, Volume 1, 1867–1893, edited
by Nathan Houser and Christian J. W. Kloesel, 1–10. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
———. (1894) 1998. “What Is a Sign?” In The Essential Peirce: Selected Philosoph-
ical Writings, Volume II, 1893–1913, edited by Peirce Edition Project, 4–10.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
———. (1903) 1998a. “The Categories Defended (Lecture III).” In The Essential
Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, Volume II, 1893–1913, edited by Peirce
Edition Project, 160–78. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press.
———. (1903) 1998b. “Sundry Logical Conceptions (1903).” In The Essential
Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, Volume II, 1893–1913, edited by Peirce
Edition Project, 267–88. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
———. (1906) 1998. “Excerpts from Letters to Lady Welby.” In The Essential
Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, Volume II, 1893–1913, edited by Peirce
Edition Project, 477–91. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
———. 1932. Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Volume II: Elements of
Logic. Edited by Charles Hartshorne and Paul Weiss. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Peters, Julie Stone. 2005. “Law, Literature, and the Vanishing Real: On the Future
of an Interdisciplinary Illusion.” PMLA 120(2):442–53.
Piper, Adrian. 1999. Out of Order, Out of Sight, Volume 1: Selected Writings in Meta-
Art 1968–1992. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Plumwood, Val. 1993. Feminism and the Mastery of Nature. New York: Routledge.
Szymanek, Angelique. 2016. “Bloody Pleasures: Ana Mendieta’s Violent Tableaux.”
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 41(4):895–925.
Viso, Olga M. 2004. Ana Mendieta: Earth Body; Sculpture and Performance, 1972–
1985. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.
Wallace, Michele. 1979. Black Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman. New York:
Dial.
Williams, Linda. 1991. “Film Bodies: Gender, Genre, and Excess.” Film Quarterly
44(4):2–13.
172
y
Dango
