© Association for Art History 2020
200
Reviews
The Writerly and the 
Dialogical Imagination of 
Feminist Art History
Francesco Ventrella
Lee Lozano: Not Working, by Jo Applin, New 
Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2018, 
192 pp., 108 col. and 5 b & w illus., hardback, $45.00
Addressing the Other Woman: Textual 
Correspondences in Feminist Art and Writing, 
by Kimberly Lamm, Manchester: Manchester 
University Press, 2018, 322 pp., 64 b & w illus., 
hardback, £80.00
On handling for the first time Jo Applin’s beautiful 
volume, I was immediately drawn to the endpaper at 
its front and the back, intelligently designed with blank 
squared pages that recall the perforated sheets of the 
artist’s many notebooks and ‘write-up’ pieces. I have 
always had a passion for squared or graphed paper. 
The organization of writing across the grid gives an 
orientation to thoughts and ideas, a sense of movement 
and development in space. Offered to the readers as 
an empty field for their own writing, blank endpapers 
lend themselves to inscribing dialogues with books. 
Reading Applin’s monograph with Kimberly Lamm’s 
recent volume offers an opportunity to investigate the 
connections that writing entertains with the dialogic 
imagination of feminist art history. 
Organized around three sections, Lamm’s analysis 
of the works of Adrian Piper, Nancy Spero and Mary 
Kelly is presented through a generative conversation 
with, respectively, Angela Davis, Valerie Solanas and 
Laura Mulvey. Lamm does not use these writers to 
explain the artists, but instead creates convincing 
dialogues to examine their resonances in feminist 
practices of the 1970s. 
Dialogues do not rest on similarities of arguments 
or points of view. Instead, good dialogues must 
transform and shape new possibilities for the speakers. 
What these two books demonstrate is that art history 
too can be a dialogical practice in which – as Applin says 
of Lozano with Hannah Arendt – ‘talking and trying to 
make sense of one another is the only way that “people 
can experience meaningfulness” as they “live and move 
and act in the world”’ (125).
Both volumes use an array of dialogical tropes to 
explore feminist conversations that resonate through 
time. When Applin engages with Lozano’s ecstatic Wave 
series from 1968–70, for instance, she moves beyond 
the traditional interpretation of these paintings in 
relation to sexuality or electromagnetism, in order 
to intertwine a compelling argument about the 
besidedness of abstraction and feminism in those years 
when it was being described in terms of waves for the 
very first time (87).1 Thus the author imaginatively 
uses Virginia Woolf’s 1929 novel of the same name 
to describe Lozano’s paintings as ‘moving one after 
another’, while opening up lines of communication 
with other minimalist artists of her generation, such 
as Agnes Martin and Jo Baer. Lamm too explores the 
dialogical imagination of feminist art history when 
she borrows from Ellen E. Berry and Hortense Spillers 
phrases like ‘affective resonance’ or ‘telegraphic coding’ 
to navigate the material connectedness between 
feminist consciousness and artmaking (51, 146). 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/arthistory/article/43/1/200/7277608 by Eva SternkÃ?Â¼ker user on 07 January 2026

© Association for Art History 2020
201
Reviews
Her third section on Kelly and Mulvey examines the 
relationships between collective desires and feminist 
reading by specifically centring on the dialogues that 
informed their respective practices. Thus Lamm sees 
the protests staged against the Miss World contest 
outside the Albert Hall in London in 1970 as one of 
many collective gatherings that galvanized the desire to 
develop useful tools for decoding the ‘hieroglyphs’ of 
patriarchal culture by which women were made visible 
in public. The author turns to the impact of feminist 
reading groups and illuminates, by summoning 
up several voices from the library and the archive, 
how they functioned like a form of mirroring ‘that 
enabled women’s feminist insights to develop and take 
hold in public discourse’ (247). Lamm’s familiarity 
with psychoanalytical theory produces a perceptive 
understanding of the politics of reading analytically, 
then and now. Placed in this framework, Mulvey’s film 
Riddles of the Sphinx (1977) and Kelly’s installation Post-
Partum Document (1973–79) acquire collective resonance 
as works that were made in conversation with feminists’ 
ongoing efforts to read and decipher the social 
conditions that underpin representations of femininity 
in the home and at work. 
Lamm and Applin both take stock of art writing 
that teases out the relationship between subjectivity 
and consciousness. Their shared desire is to interrogate 
the social reproduction of gender within art history 
and they are equally concerned with writing on and 
in women’s artistic practices of the 1970s. Visibly, the 
artists discussed in these two books worked with 
writing, juxtaposing texts and images, and scrutinized 
language. However, writing is also treated as a complex 
and layered practice of inscription of the self, a 
cultural coding that materially conditions the body, 
and a configuration of discourses that exceeds orders 
of signification. Of course, Lozano’s ‘write-ups’ are 
only one side of a complex and very diverse artistic 
practice, including drawing and painting, which are 
also comprehensively discussed in the book (see plate 1). 
Applin is extremely careful to avoid a progressive 
narrative about Lozano’s giving up traditional media 
first, and then art altogether. This, in fact, was never the 
case for the artist, since the write-up pieces coexisted 
with the paintings, often in a dialogue that the author 
unravels with lucidity and eloquence.
In contrast, Lamm deals specifically with three artists 
who made works that she associates with the ‘writerly’ 
(6). This term is used only once in her introduction, 
but it is illuminating to navigate the conceptual space 
circumscribed by both books under review. Borrowed 
from Roland Barthes, the writerly may refer to a practice 
of signification that requires readers to engage actively 
with a text to create meaning, rather than passively 
consume it.2 The writerly may at first appear obvious 
with regard to Lozano’s ‘write-ups’: investigations, 
propositions and purposes that the artist organized in 
and through writing. Yet Applin has done an amazing 
job at engaging with the artist’s notebooks as well as with 
their peculiar status as objects. Sometimes numbered in 
an inconsequential way, these notebooks often contain 
addenda or notes written on cigarette paper that only 
complicate the linearity of the texts. Such writerly 
strategies challenge the scholarly drive to rearrange them 
correctly. In fact, the notebooks are not employed to 
provide an explanation of Lozano’s ‘real’ work; Applin 
does not consider them as separate from it. Instead she 
reflects on the artist’s activities in terms of ‘art-life’ work 
(28). Indeed, as Applin argues, the notebooks are not a 
private archive but are written for posterity, and it is in 
this temporal slippage that their public value as work lies.
The question of temporality seems literally 
inscribed in Lozano’s own occupation with writing. 
The infamous decision to quit the art world, which 
corresponded with the start of her Dropout Piece in 1970, is 
in fact expressed in her notebooks via an examination of 
the right place words have in our books:
Do I want to ret’n to learning from books? Does 
the body want to lie passive while the mind 
loads? Do I want to dropout from the world & 
retreat to books? Do I want to dropout from 
world & books? Do I want to study from books 
as weapon to use when participating in world? 
Or do I want to search for new knowledge/info 
systems, inventing other ways of learning for 
myself? (146)
This passage interrogates the complicated relationship 
between knowledge and consciousness also probed by 
other feminist thinkers throughout the 1970s: Audre 
Lorde, Carla Lonzi, Hélène Cixous. Lozano will never 
answer such questions in writing, but she engaged 
in a series of ‘performances of inaction’ that Applin 
rigorously documents in her volume, aptly bookended 
by two chapters whose very titles become the measure 
of the artist’s radical implications: from ‘Lee Lozano 
versus the Art World’ to ‘Lee Lozano versus the World’. 
Lozano’s write-up pieces document the many things 
she stopped doing in her life: not engaging anymore 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/arthistory/article/43/1/200/7277608 by Eva SternkÃ?Â¼ker user on 07 January 2026

© Association for Art History 2020
202
Reviews
with her professional network, quitting smoking weed, 
leaving letters unanswered, not talking to women 
altogether. Applin has written some inspiring pages 
about an artist who is so at odds with the feminist 
movement, but whose work and life still have the 
capacity to interpellate feminists, even more loudly so in 
times of equality and diversity management. 
1 Lee Lozano, Dialogue Piece, 1969. Graphite on squared 
notebook paper (from ‘Private Laboratory Notebook 2’, page 
43), 28 × 22.9 cm. Hartford, CT: Wadsworth Athenaeum 
Museum. Photo: Allen Phillips.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/arthistory/article/43/1/200/7277608 by Eva SternkÃ?Â¼ker user on 07 January 2026

© Association for Art History 2020
203
Reviews
‘It is a feminism that may not always call itself by that 
name’, Applin cautions at the end of her book, ‘and it is 
important precisely because of its refusal to conform, to 
be reasonable and sane’ (158). 
For Barthes, the writerly could also be deployed 
for materializing texts and laying bare those rhetorical 
techniques that produce the sufficiency of naturalism. 
One form of naturalism that Lamm unstintingly tackles 
in her book is that embodied in the image of ‘woman’ 
when exchanged as a sign of male discourse. Piper, Spero 
and Kelly all made language their primary material. 
In the process, they wrote across images – and turned 
words into images – to make the viewer ‘see the picture 
embedded in language and then notice that words shape 
not only how people see but determine what is allowed 
to appear’ (6). This is doubly significant with regard to 
Piper’s work which, as Lamm explains, challenged ‘the 
entrenched perceptual histories that place black women 
on the “other side” of the sign woman’ (25). 
In approaching Piper’s early work, Lamm goes 
beyond merely discussing an aesthetic of writing. 
Instead, she intelligently underscores the artist’s writerly 
strategies for ‘rewriting the conditions in which black 
women are allowed to appear’ (53). Thus writing 
becomes ‘a tool for reflecting on what it means to be 
denied access to a valued place in the symbolic order 
and perceived to be an irrational person whose words 
can easily be “garbled”’ (32). Lamm supplies some 
thought-provoking paragraphs in which she suggests 
that Piper employed the space of the page to isolate her 
consciousness and reorient herself beyond the process 
of racialization reproduced in white patriarchal culture. 
Discussed alongside minimalist and conceptual artists 
like Sol LeWitt and Robert Morris, Piper’s works such as 
Here and Now (1968) and Concrete Infinity 6″ Square (1968) are 
set apart by the author as original attempts to write the ‘I’ 
otherwise. Lamm is particularly successful in engaging 
the writings of Angela Davis and Hortense Spillers. 
Her dialogue with the latter’s groundbreaking essay 
‘Mama’s Baby, Papa’s Maybe: An American Grammar 
Book’ (1987) offers an extremely original analysis of 
Piper’s commitment to rewriting the visibility of black 
women in American culture against a violent process 
of ‘ungendering’. With this term, Spillers famously 
defined the reduction of the black female body to a zero 
degree of flesh that produces the exclusion of that body 
from the physical and cultural outlines defining other 
women. Lamm is extremely careful in positioning 
Spillers’ historical theory of how images of black women 
have become identified with chaotic and disordered 
stereotypes invented by white patriarchal culture to 
mirror its own power. When she reads Piper’s work 
with Davis’ enunciations – her letters to George Jackson 
and her trial defence – Lamm articulates two different 
but interconnected strategies of commitment to the 
shattering of the distortions and manipulations that 
sanction the ‘theft’ of black women’s representation. This 
term, which she borrows from Davis, becomes central 
to Lamm’s argument about black feminist strategies 
to write against the policing of the sign ‘woman’. Her 
critique of the visual rhetoric of structural racism is 
particularly resonant today, in the wake of the Black 
Lives Matter movement’s exposure of the unbearable but 
fundamental truth that violence against black life is the 
norm in our modernity, and not the exception.3
The theft of language is also one of the underlying 
ideas in Lamm’s third chapter on Spero’s work. This she 
considers in relation to attempts to invent alternative 
languages to interrupt the reproduction of the ‘feminine 
mystique’ that conflates woman with kindness and 
docility. Set against the background of Betty Friedan’s 
liberal influence on the public discourse of the women’s 
lib movement in the United States, Spero’s magnum 
opus Codex Artaud (1971) gives access to another form of 
feminist speech invested in anger as a productive site to 
counter the repressive silence which coerced women 
into denying ‘their capacities to use aggression as a force 
to create change’ (127). Spero’s visual references to the 
tongue in her work represent a graphic bridge between 
the conceptual possibility of a different language and the 
physical ability to speak with a difference. The need for 
such embodied exploration of language echoes Cixous’ 
preoccupation with écriture féminine, first introduced in 
the essay ‘The Laugh of Medusa’ (1975). Addressing 
women readers directly, Cixous’ manifesto reads like 
a plea to stop signifying within the discourse of man, 
and use writing to dislocate that space ‘to make it hers, 
containing it, taking it in her own mouth, biting that 
tongue with her very own teeth to invent for herself a 
language to get inside of’.4 Writing for Cixous is a means 
to take back those ‘goods’ that have been taken away 
from her as woman, starting from her own body, for a 
woman without a body, she concludes, ‘can’t possibly 
be a good fighter’.5 Thus Lamm indicates that Spero’s 
Codex must be considered as an exercise in writing that 
‘allows women to stop swallowing the scripts of shame 
embedded in patriarchal discourse’ (121). 
Spero was also a member of the Art Workers’ 
Coalition (WAC), organized to implement economic 
and political reforms of how artists were employed and 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/arthistory/article/43/1/200/7277608 by Eva SternkÃ?Â¼ker user on 07 January 2026

© Association for Art History 2020
204
Reviews
paid by art institutions. The coalition, as is well known, 
quickly absorbed other social movements of the era, such 
as the anti-Vietnam war movement and the women’s 
movement. It is in this climate that Spero got involved in 
a fringe of WAC, namely the Women Artists in Revolution 
(WAR), a group that included Lucy Lippard and Faith 
Ringgold. Lamm is particularly attentive to the different 
contingencies of this invitation to fight by writing. This is 
clear from the way she places Spero’s artistic practices in 
the context of women’s activism in the early 1970s. Codex 
Artaud’s claim to aggression against patriarchal language 
becomes particularly significant when connected to the 
Women’s General Strike of 1971, which took place in 
the streets of American cities to demand visibility for 
women’s undervalued or unrecognized labour. Lamm 
comments on some of the placards and street demos 
to show how women’s protest, like Spero’s Codex, used 
both humour and anger to reclaim language under 
circumstances that would otherwise silence their voices. 
Feminist protest and art, Lamm suggests, ‘were rewriting 
the imaginary conditions in which women were allowed 
to appear’ (125). 
Lamm stresses the need for acknowledging links 
between collective protest and the search for another 
language, and turns to how women artists and critics 
found correspondences to solidify their sense of 
belonging. A letter that Spero wrote to Lippard in 
October 1971 on the occasion of the exhibition of the 
Codex Artaud at the A.I.R. gallery in New York becomes 
a means to point to how these correspondences were 
materially tied to writing. Written in block letters, the 
letter is composed of one single line: ‘DEAR LUCY, 
THE ENEMIES OF WOMEN’S LIBERATION IN THE 
ARTS WILL BE CRUSHED. LOVE, Nancy’. Presented 
as a ‘declaration of love for the sake of war’ (135), 
Spero’s two-line message blurs the boundaries between 
personal and collective recognition at a time she was 
pushing these very issues in the making of Codex. 
Interestingly, this letter brings to memory another from 
Lippard that Lozano decided not to open, usually considered 
the beginning of her boycott of women. Lozano’s response 
to the strikes was very different from Spero’s, but there 
may be some correlations between the open letter and the 
unopened one. In 1969 Lozano received an invitation to 
a meeting of the WAC at Lippard’s apartment, which she 
refused to attend. This prompted her to start the General Strike 
Piece in which she set herself the task to: 
gradually but determinedly avoid being present 
at official or public ‘uptown’ functions or 
gathering related to the ‘art world’ […] Exhibit 
in public only pieces which further sharing of 
ideas & information related to total personal & 
public revolution. (131) 
When given the opportunity to read a statement at the 
WAC’s Open Public Hearing on 10 April 1969, Lozano 
polemically stated that no reform of working relations 
could replace the necessity for an overthrow of the 
entire cultural, scientific, political and sexual system: ‘I 
will participate only in a total revolution simultaneously 
personal and public’ (134). Applin rightly points out that 
Lozano chose a public hearing to manifest her personal 
dissent, for ‘Lozano did not quietly withdraw her labour 
from the art world “workforce”, any more than she held 
back from announcing to a room of her peers that she 
found their meeting “appalling”’ (134). A certain effect 
comes from engaging with Lozano’s statements today. 
Their individual, sometimes intimate tone clashes with 
the loudness projected onto an imagined public sphere 
by their capital lettering. As Julia Bryan-Wilson has 
noted, Lozano’s emphasis on the personal and public, its 
‘rousing, idealistic vision’ and its shortness, have made 
her words a popular public chant in recent years.6
A second letter from Lippard received in early 
August of the same year ended up in the ‘defunct pile’ of 
unanswered letters. This episode in her notebook marks 
the final decision to start boycotting women, initially 
intended as a short-term measure. In fact, Lozano wrote 
that she hoped the boycott would not only restore but 
improve her dialogue with other women. However, as is 
well known, it lasted until the end of Lozano’s life. 
Applin interrogates this boycott from within the 
very dialectic internal to the feminist art movement of 
the time. She proposes placing Lozano alongside other 
artists that struggled with the identification ‘woman 
artist’, like Eva Hesse, Agnes Martin and Jo Baer. Applin 
stresses the need for a deeper understanding of the 
issues confronted by some women in the feminist 
movement who also received personal recognition in 
the art world, often with the consequence of drawing 
criticism from their feminist comrades (137). This 
tension, located by other feminist art historians at the 
end of the decade, was in fact perceived already from 
the beginning and, as Applin makes clear, on both sides 
of the Atlantic and by women artists and critics alike. 
For instance, Lippard too thought of herself as exiting 
the art world by becoming a feminist, and the Italian 
art critic Lonzi professed that women’s absence from 
culture could perform a ‘dramatic act of awareness, 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/arthistory/article/43/1/200/7277608 by Eva SternkÃ?Â¼ker user on 07 January 2026

© Association for Art History 2020
205
Reviews
creative because it is liberating’ (121). Thus, for Lozano, 
being physically present yet politically withdrawn from 
the feminist movement was a Bartleby-like gesture, 
Applin suggests. This needs to be taken into account if 
2 Adrian Piper, Concrete Documentation Infinity Piece, 1970, 
page 8 (untitled, Sunday 6 July 1970). Fifty-seven framed graph 
paper pages with black-and-white photographs and handwritten 
script, each 29.2 × 24.7 cm. Los Angeles: Los Angeles Museum 
of Contemporary Art. © Adrian Piper Research Archive 
Foundation, Berlin.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/arthistory/article/43/1/200/7277608 by Eva SternkÃ?Â¼ker user on 07 January 2026

© Association for Art History 2020
206
Reviews
we want to understand the impact of ‘feminist misfits’ 
within and not outside the women’s movement. ‘At its 
most extreme and ambitious’, Applin concludes, works 
like Dropout Piece ‘can be understood less as a conceptual 
artwork predicated on a hostile gesture of refusal, 
than as a serious, considered and active process of 
withdrawing from the world, in order that she might 
begin to remake it anew’ (151). 
This is a fascinating reading of Dropout Piece, General 
Strike Piece and the boycott of women as dialogical pieces 
of collective interpellation founded on the exercise of 
singularity; ideas that germinated already in 1969 with 
Dialogue Piece (plate1). In this earlier ‘art-life’ project, Lozano 
recorded meetings with fellow artists and friends to 
have conversations, the contents of which were never 
recorded in the piece. Paradoxically, as she states in her 
write-up, the aim of the piece was ‘NOT TO MAKE A 
PIECE’ (110). Although this position appears to contradict 
the collectivism and organized feminist politics of 
the time, Applin shows how it becomes particularly 
significant when related to consciousness-raising groups 
and feminist separatism which took the self as a starting 
point for collective awareness (121). Not working, not 
participating, not speaking, and so forth, are actions 
which are not devoid of consequences. What Applin 
slowly delineates, therefore, is the need to distinguish 
between work and action in Lozano’s practice. It is 
towards this end that she engages in a revealing dialogue 
with Arendt’s political philosophy, a writer who 
incidentally also refused the feminist label. In The Human 
Condition (1958), Arendt considered the political arena as 
a space of action necessary to describe the public ‘space 
of appearances’ in which the political conditions of the 
self become visible here and now.7 The absence of work 
in Lozano’s practice, therefore, becomes a precondition 
for carving out such a space at the heart of the politics 
of both the art world and the feminist movement of 
her time. Thus, as Applin writes, Dialogue Piece can be 
considered ‘a political act that took place within a “space 
of appearances” that was in this instance Lozano’s loft, 
from where her small scale, yet nonetheless ambitious, 
attempt at world-building took shape’ (125). 
Lamm never mentions Lozano in her book, but it 
is interesting to notice how Applin considers Solanas 
and Piper, also treated extensively in Addressing the Other 
Woman. Indeed, the Arendtian conceptualization of 
the ‘space of appearances’ proposed by Applin could 
be useful to interrogate Lamm’s own concerns with 
how women are allowed to become visible, which 
she returns to over and over in her book. For Applin, 
Solanas is another ‘feminist misfit’ and notebook-
keeper and, like Lozano, she too demanded not 
reform but revolution (Applin, 142). Both challenged 
the representation of women’s position expressed by 
Friedan’s Feminine Mystique, which was the ideological 
discourse behind the Women’s Strike for Equality, 
of which both were critical: ‘SCUM will not picket, 
demonstrate, march or strike’ (162). As Lamm elucidates 
the dialectic between liberal and radical feminisms, 
she reaches the conclusion that the sexually dissident 
Solanas had very little to share with a struggle based on 
the reproduction of a heterosexual model of femininity. 
Not fitting in, therefore, is not necessarily the outcome 
of a pathological discourse, but could represent a 
concerted expression of refusal that stands up in the 
guise of an act of resistance. Both Solanas and Lozano 
saw unwork and not working as radical positions to 
manifest dissent, and also to create new social relations 
in the world. In a sense, Lamm’s phrasing seems to 
imply that, for Solanas, cutting up the world created 
by men was a means to ‘open up a space for women 
to rewrite the world with vibrant, even thrilling 
differences’ (148). Like Lamm, Applin too refuses to 
give us a heroic representation of Solanas and Lozano’s 
progressive withdrawal from the art world and their 
refusal to be assimilated within liberal feminism. 
Instead, both authors eloquently appraise the position of 
vulnerability and fragility from which these two artists 
abolished the boundaries between work and life. As 
Applin puts it, quitting was not a choice for Lozano, but 
a necessity for survival, ‘a striving through vanishing to 
create or make sense of the world, of her world’ (151).
Refusals also seem to organize Lozano’s overlap 
with another artist discussed by Lamm, namely Piper. In 
1970, when she withdrew her work from the Conceptual 
Art and Conceptual Aspects exhibition at the Cultural 
Centre in New York to support the anti-war protests, 
she published a statement in which she explained that 
she decided ‘submit her absence as evidence of the 
inability of art expression to have meaningful existence 
under conditions other than those of peace, equality, 
truth, trust and freedom’ (136). Piper and Lozano also 
shortened the gap between writing and representation 
through a series of task-oriented exercises which 
documented and made visible the body. In Concrete 
Documentation Infinity Piece (plate 2), for instance, the artist’s 
meticulously handwritten notes document daily routines 
and their effect on her own body. ‘The visual appearance 
of Piper’s handwriting’, Lamm concludes, ‘announces 
that this artwork is mapping spaces between what can 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/arthistory/article/43/1/200/7277608 by Eva SternkÃ?Â¼ker user on 07 January 2026

© Association for Art History 2020
207
Reviews
and cannot be seen’ of the black female body. There is a 
clear correspondence with Lozano’s most complex task-
oriented write-up pieces, like Grass Piece, No-Grass Piece, 
and Masturbation Investigation (all of 1969), in which she too 
placed her body under pressure to expose physical and 
psychological changes of state occurring with the passing 
of time. More than just capturing bodily changes, 
writing here seems to drive them; a literal ‘writing of the 
body’ out of the monolithic script of patriarchal culture 
into a self-imposed and self-defined system which may 
give an interim access to authenticity.
What these two books make explicit is that no 
engagement can be made with writing – writing as art, 
but also art writing – without a serious commitment 
to close reading. It is indeed in this rigorous, sustained, 
but also creative relay between writing and reading 
that feminist scholarship can start to offer a glimpse of 
a body of work, and a body at work, that is not already 
written, scripted, or stereotyped. Lamm and Applin 
have treated writing as a transhistorical membrane, a 
means of putting into communication the personal space 
of the text with the political arena of our readings. This 
is feminist writing that does not mimic the same old 
disciplinary discourses. Instead, this form of writing 
demonstrates the transformative effects that inhere in 
refusing or defusing the political structures of meaning 
and signification that pervade hegemonic culture. Read 
side by side, Lamm and Applin have created a dialogical 
representation of the politics of radical feminism 
by drawing a map of resonances that troubles over-
simplistic narratives about feminist art history. And 
in looking at the decade that occupies a unique place 
in the ongoing history of the transnational feminist 
movement, they have uncovered hitherto unassessed 
materials and proposed insightful new readings in the 
archives of feminism, whilst also presenting us with an 
archival rearrangement that produces new objects with 
which to think art history.
Notes
1	
Applin here is making explicit reference to Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, 
Touching Feeling: Affect, Pedagogy, Performativity, Durham, NC, 2003, 8. 
2	
Roland Barthes, S/Z: An Essay, New York, 1974, 5. 
3	
See Christina Sharpe, In the Wake: On Blackness and Being, Durham, NC, 
2016. 
4	
Hélène Cixous, ‘The Laugh of Medusa’ [1975], in New French Feminisms, 
ed. Elaine Marks and Isabelle De Courtivron, Boston, 1981, 257. 
5	
Cixous, ‘The Laugh of Medusa’, 250. 
6	
Julia Bryan-Wilson, Art Workers: Radical Practice in the Vietnam War Era, 
Berkeley, 2009, 216–217.
7	
See Seyla Benhabib, ‘Feminist Theory and Hannah Arendt’s Concept of 
Public Space’, History of the Human Sciences, 6: 2, 1993, 97–114.
Painting Matters
Katie Scott
The Painter’s Touch: Boucher, Chardin, Fragonard, 
by Ewa Lajer-Burcharth, Princeton and Oxford: 
Princeton University Press, 2018, 312 pp., 154 col. 
and 104 b. & w. illus., hardback, £50
La Griffe du peintre: La valeur de l’art (1730–1820), 
by Charlotte Guichard, Paris: Seuil, 2018, 368 pp., 98 
col. illus., paperback, €31
The Painter’s Touch and La Griffe du peintre effect a disciplinary 
shift: a turn away from the viewer towards the artist 
as focus of research and inquiry in eighteenth-century 
French art history.1 Boucher, Chardin and Fragonard 
are the three painters whose ‘touch’ (respectively 
characterized as ‘tact’, ‘craft’ and ‘seduction’) is explored 
by Ewa Lajer-Burcharth, while ‘griffe’ is the eighteenth-
century word resurrected and given renewed currency 
by Charlotte Guichard to denote that quintessential 
index of modern artistic identity, that finishing touch 
of the brush: the artist’s signature. For her too, Chardin, 
Boucher and Fragonard, along with Hubert Robert and 
Jacques-Louis David, are star players in her story. Both 
books also prioritize practice. They ask not so much 
what the concepts of touch and signature respectively 
presuppose, or what specific forms of painting these 
notions envisioned, but how, materially, an object 
of representation was turned into a sign, and how 
signature became an artistic convention. For Lajer-
Burcharth, practice refers both to the ‘highly individual 
approach to process and handling’ that characterizes 
the painting of her subjects of study and to the operation 
of those practices in the formation of sets of relations, 
characteristic of art as a recognized and esteemed form 
of knowledge. Guichard, meanwhile, not only traces and 
describes practices called artistic by dint of signature, 
she also analyses the visual discourses that represent, as 
well as register, those practices; that is, she attends to 
what the paintings themselves have to say about having 
been painted, and about having had that experience 
noted by deposit of a proper name on the paint-surface.
Of the two books, Guichard’s intersects most 
comfortably with the existing scholarly narratives 
about the eighteenth century, in so far as her research 
offers the reader a new and fascinating vantage point 
from which to observe the transformation of the early 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/arthistory/article/43/1/200/7277608 by Eva SternkÃ?Â¼ker user on 07 January 2026
